--- page 21 ---
fer
it is it is given as a bolus immediately. You don't have to give it as an infusion. The problem
with tenectoplase is the most expensive of the brain and not often available. But if you have a
choice, you go for tenectoplase first, then autoplase, then stiptokinase. But any fibranolutic agent,
given timelessly, is better than nothing. Coupled with the fibranolutic agent that dissolves the
hummus, you have to use additional anti-thrombotic therapy in STEMI. You use two anti-platelet agents.
You give aspirin an entire tablet to chew. Why to chew? Because it's rapid absorption. And then
aspirin indefinitely for life at a dose of approximately 100 milligrams a day.
In the setting of STEMI, you have to give a second anti-platelet agent. And in our
state facility, we have clopidic realm. You give a loading dose of 300 milligrams, followed by 75
milligrams a day. And this dual anti-platelet therapy is given for one year, meaning both
anti-platelet drugs are given for one year. At the end of one year, clopidic realm is generally
stopped, but aspirin is continued for life. In the acute setting, not only do we give the
fibranolutic agent, plus the anti-platelet, two anti-platelet agents, we also give an anti-thumbin.
And we either give enoxyparin or heparin. Not both yet. It's either enoxyparin or heparin.
Enoxyparin is preferred because it's given sub-initially in STEMI as an IV stat, followed by sub-cut 12
only. It's preferred because of the sub-cut ease of administration, whereas heparin is given as
continuous intravenous infusion. And heparin has to be monitored, so it makes it a bit more cumbersome.
But if you have nothing else, you will use heparin. So to recap, fibranolutic agent,
plus two anti-platelet agents, plus either enoxyparin or heparin. That is a minimum of four
agents, of four anti-thumbotic agents to rise the clot and maintain vessel patency in all patients
with step. What we mean by a percutaneous coronary intervention, as I said, this in skilled hands
leads to 95% opening of the vessel, whereas with fibranolutic therapy at best, you will get about
64% of patients having an open artery. We enter the heart. We enter the coronary artery. There's
a metal stent mounted on the balloon. We expand the balloon. Then we deflate the balloon,
--- page 22 ---
and what's left is a metal scaffold. Over time, the endothelium vessel incorporates
this metal or metallic stent into the wall of the vessel. And usually, this takes anywhere between
one and three months. These are just angiograms to show. On your left-hand side is a right coronary
artery that's completely occluded. The middle picture shows a balloon with a stent mounted on it
across the occluded segment, and the picture on the right shows this totally occluded vessel
that's widely opened. That is the benefit of primary angioplasty or stenting, because it's done
under direct visualization. You can relate the artery. The occluded artery is ballooned open,
and immediately you can get and see that the vessel is widely patented. This is considered
best therapy in patients with acetylubation, myocardial infarction. Adjunctive therapy,
you need to relieve pain. You either give morphine as a titration, or you give nitrates.
Obviously, you don't use too much of morphine, because it can provoke a nausea and vomiting,
or in a patient who is compromised, it can lead to excessive sedation. Nitrates, just be careful.
If the patient has low blood pressure. In the acute setting, if the patient does not have an
inferior infarct with heart block, remember, inferior infarct, the right coronary artery,
or the circumflex artery may be supplied, the SAO AV note, and inferior infarcts some patients
get heart block. If there's no evidence of heart block or bradycardia, meaning a heart rate below 60,
you can safely administer beta blocker, because it's all which is myocardial.
We give very high dose statin. The usual dose of a statin may be, for example,
atover statin. We use in the state sector at a dose of 20 milligrams as chronic therapy,
but in the acute setting, we go for maximum therapy, which is 80 milligrams of a tone of statin.
If the patient has, you have echo facilities, and your ejection fraction is below 40%, the earlier
you start an ACE inhibitor to prevent remodeling, the better the LV function will be in the long term.
So these are a chunk of therapies. And as we spoke about earlier, there are general measures,
if the oxygen saturation is below 90%, we will give supplemental oxygen.
And we treat conditions, anemia, and COPD, and all the other things that I've mentioned before,
--- page 23 ---
blood pressure is uncontrolled, or you have infections, you can institute therapy to reduce myocardial
oxygen demand. There are contraindications to fibronolitis. One is, if you have severe
uncontrolled hypertension, although the books say that this is a contraindication,
it's not difficult to lower blood pressure. You can start the patient on a nitrate, intravenous
nitrate, infusion, which you can control minute by minute, and give blood pressure down to below
150 systolic, and then you can safely administer bivroom lysis. If the patient has had a history
of a hemorrhagic stroke, or any indecent stroke that is less than six months old, that's a contraindication.
If the patient has a brain tumor or recent severe head trauma, was this the bivronolitis can cause
interclinial hemorrhage. Similarly, if you've had major trauma or major surgery within the
preceding two weeks, then you cannot administer a bivronolitic agent. If you have active internal
breathing, such as active piptic ulcer, you suspect a yortic dissection, which may occur in older
men, especially if they hypertensive. It can aggravate the condition. You can't give it in
pregnant women, because of the risk of tooth fetus. And if you've had prolonged automatic CPR,
obviously this may cause an internal injury or confusion on the heart wall. And by given a
fibronolitic you made, it caused bigger problems. But having shown this slide, this is just to alert
you. But by far, the bulk of patients do not have these contraindications, and don't use this as an
excuse not to administer lysis in the appropriate patient.
Complications of STEMI, you can get arrhythmias. Early on, when patients succumb, either on the
roadside, at home, in their sleep, sudden cardiac death. That is, as soon as the vessel occludes,
and the individual myocyte begins to die, it can provoke ventricular tachycardia or ventricular
fibrillation. And if that's not attended to immediately, that leads to sudden death. So that's what we
call primarily VT or VF leading to sudden death. Heart block I spoke about. If you have a right
cardinal artery or multiple vessels blocked, you can get high degree heart block, which is
type 2 heart block or complete heart block. And then that requires emergency insertion
of a temporary pacemaker. On the redeemer, if more than 40% of the left ventricle is
--- page 24 ---
impacted, you can get leventricular failure or pulmonary demon. Cardiogenic shock.
This is persistent low blood pressure, uracidotic, the hypoperfusion of all the major organs.
There are a common cause of mortality in STEMI patients is linked to cardiogenic shock. Because
once you enter the shock state, it's very difficult to reverse even with primary
angioplasty and stenting. Occasionally, we get cardiac rupture where you can get a full thickness
myocardial infarct and the ventricle ruptures. You can get acute mitral regurgitation because
the mitral valve is attached to the ventricular wall by the pulmonary muscle. And if you get
infarction or ischemia of the pulmonary muscle, you may get regurgitation. A ventricular septal
defect is the interventricular septal counter rupture, full thickness infarction. And these
mechanical problems that acute mitral regurgitation, especially ventricular septal defect,
are also pretty ominous because in the acute setting to take to surgery is very ominous.
And obviously, in the long term, you get heart failure. The common cause of heart failure worldwide
accounting for 70% of underlying cause of heart failure is ischemic heart disease
and obviously in the setting of infarction. What is 30-day mortality in STEMI? Remember, STEMI
is the most devastating treatable manifestation of coronary artery disease.
Untreated 30-day mortality is as high as 40%. If you administer a timeless
vibranolitic therapy, 30-day mortality is reduced to about 9%. And if you give it very early,
and as we said, ideally within three hours of the onset of chest pain, but the earlier the better,
vibranol lysis or opening up the vessel within one hour of occlusion reduces 30-day mortality
to 1%. This is pretty dramatic and again, emphasizes the importance of timeless institution of
reperfusion therapy and attacking not only the thumbus by at least four agents, but as well as
treating the underlying plaque and reducing plaque vulnerability.
We finished STEMI. The last few slides is on non-STEMI and unstable angina.
Non-STEMI and unstable angina are also for category of acute coronary syndromes. And as we said,
acute coronary syndrome makes the patient more vulnerable to infunction and death.
--- page 25 ---
How do we define non-ester-elevation acute coronary syndrome or non-STEMI and unstable angina?
These conditions, the two differ only in severity. In a non-ester-elevation acute coronary syndrome,
the ischemia is severe enough to cause myocardial necrosis. And how does myocardial necrosis
manifest? It causes a release of markers of myocardial injury and the most sensitive
histoponin. So in non-STEMI or non-ester-elevation acute coronary syndrome, there's evidence of myocyte
necrosis. And we know there's myocyte necrosis when we get elevation of troponin or creatinine
kinase. A troponin is the go-to biomarker that has really altered the management of coronary artery
disease. In unstable angina, there is no biochemical marker of my insect necrosis meaning. Your troponins
are negative and your creatinine kinase is negative. I mentioned creatinine kinase because it's still
available as a laboratory test. It was the original biomarker that was commonly used,
but for a long time after the past 20 years, the biomarker that's really come to the fore
is troponin level. So in STEMIs, you'll definitely get a troponin rise and the higher the troponin
rise, the worse the prognosis. But in STEMI, we don't wait for the troponin rise because we need to act
emergently. In non-STEMI, there is a thrombus, but it's not totally occlusive. There is myocyte
necrosis and the myocyte necrosis will give rise to troponin, leak. In unstable angina,
there is no troponin leak. So in terms of ominous condition, STEMI being the worst followed by
non-STEMI, then unstable angina. So why we lay emphasis on unstable angina? Because it alerts the
physician, the GP, the nurse, the primary care doctor, that a patient who has unstable angina
is perhaps now at higher risk. So unstable angina means the pattern of angina has changed
in the last 60 days, meaning that angina is becoming more frequent. It's occurring with less
effort previously, you only got it when you climb two flights of stairs. Now you're getting it walking
50 meters on the flat. Or unstable angina also refers to a new onset angina developing chest pain
for the very first time. The pathology again, as I said, you have the yellow plaque,
then the thrombus, it's not totally occlusive, bits of the thrombus break off and include downstream
vessel. And the aim of therapy is to prevent this non-aclusive thrombus becoming an occlusive one
--- page 26 ---
and causing infarction. Diagnosis, as with STEMI, is clinical symptoms and signs, ECG and biomarker,
which should be the trouble prototype biomarker. Importantly non-STEMI, we are risk stratified.
We are risk stratified into high intermediate and low risk. And why do we are risk stratified?
Because it's a strong relationship between the level of risk and prognosis. The higher the risk,
the poorer the prognosis. It also helps you decide whether you admit the patient and whether you
admit the patient to an ICU or to the won't. And it also helps you decide how aggressive you are
going to be with therapy. And as I said, it's based on symptoms, physical signs, ECG and biomarkers.
What is considered high risk non-STEMI or higher risk, non-estrelivation ACS?
If you have angina at rest in the preceding 48 hours, remember you're having angina sitting
and doing nothing. Okay, previously we know angina is occurring on effort or angina is occurring with
a severe degrees of physical activity. But if you're getting angina sitting and doing nothing,
and especially if it's recent in the preceding 48 hours, that immediately should alert the primary
care doctor that the pattern of pain is changing. The patient is vulnerable.
Examination. The point to emphasize examination in patients with coronary artery disease is often
normal. Because of pain, they may have a bit of tachycardia. Sometimes if it's an inferior
impact, you may have a bradycardia or heart block. Sometimes if there's a flow of severe
ischemia, they can have VTOVF. But most often, examination is completely normal.
Occasionally, you may get the patient with hemodynamic instability. By that, we mean a tachycardia,
heart rate of 100 or over, a bradycardia, meaning a heart rate of 40 or below, or hypotension,
systolic blood pressure is below 90. And these are patients who are severely compromised,
in addition to the tachybrady and hypotension, there is evidence of LV dysfunction. You're
hearing a third heart sound. You're hearing crackles at the basis of the lungs. The patient
may be in frank pulmonary demon. Or if you have an echomachine and you look at the cardiac
contractility, it's impaired and giving you a poor contractility or ejection fraction below 40%.
Also, vulnerable are the advanced elderly. Patients who are above this age of 75 years,
--- page 27 ---
just by virtue of age alone, they are at high risk. The ECG, ECG in non-stelivation, myocardial
infarction and unstable angina, may be completely normal. It's important to emphasize, even in
a non-stemic, the ECG may be normal. At times, you may get ST segment depression.
Good luck to you if you see it. It strengthens your hand in making the diagnosis confidently.
Or at times, you may get transient ST elevation. It means ST elevation goes up and without you
doing anything, it comes down very occasionally. That happens. If you have bundle branch block
or tachyarrhythmias like BTVF, that happens in a small proportion that may help.
The most important factor that we depend on in making a diagnosis of non-stemic is the troponin
level. So all you may have is chest pain. Your examination may be normal. I emphasize your ECG
may be normal. If you get ST segment depression, you consider yourself lucky. This is in non-stemming
or non-ecible. We are entirely dependent here on the troponin level.
Patients who are at increased risk don't neglect the patient who said a previous myocardial infar
previous angioplasty or setting of previous bypass. These patients automatically are at high risk.
If you have aposclerosis in another vascular bit, meaning a previous stroke or if you have
peripheral vascular disease, this automatically puts you at high risk and including the diabetic
patients. Dabetic patients generally don't have as good a prognosis as a non-diabetic patients.
So always pay attention to this category of patients with non-stemming.
And speaking of the ECG, as I said, the ECG may be normally more than 30% of patients.
If you're lucky, you may get ST segment depression, transylase elevation, or you can get T-wave in
version. If you're uncertain of the diagnosis, you continue performing 12 lead ECGs during
episodes of pain. Remember, in non-stemming, you're not going to get ongoing pain. You will get
pain for 5-10 minutes. It may occur at risk and then it goes away. Ongoing pain, more than 30
minutes, is a stem. In non-stemming, for unstable angina, you get pain of short duration and it
settles. And if you're uncertain of the diagnosis, while you waiting for the laboratory to give you
the troponin results during episodes of pain, repeat 12 lead ECG. And you may during an episode
--- page 28 ---
of pain, see dynamic ST segment depression for T-wave changes.
Unstable angina and low-risk individuals, as I mentioned, any nuanced pain
is considered unstable angina. Examination is normal, the ECG is normal, and biomarkers troponins are
all normal. This patient is not admitted, is put on therapy like aspirin, statin. We give
additional therapy to control blood pressure and diabetes or whatever risk factor. And once we
started medication, then we risk-ratify with symptoms, with a probably an ECU exercise stress test,
and then decide whether we need to do any additional imaging like an angiogram,
or we just continue a drug therapy. The management of the highest non-stemming,
we admit for bed rest and we give oxygen if the saturations are low. And specifically,
we give anti- ischemic, anti-platelet, anti-thrombin. And once we give those therapies,
and if the troponins are elevated, we go for angiography in opening up the artery
and chronically to control the risk factors so that the patient doesn't come back repeatedly
with additional blockages. Anti- ischemic therapy is nitrates, can give it from five to 200 mics
depending on the severity of pain and provided the blood pressure, the systolic blood pressure is
above 100. We can increase the dose every three to five minutes until the symptom settles or
blood pressure falls below 100, once below 100, we don't increase the dose. And the only problem
with the nitrate is some patients complain of headache. Morphine titration, we can give increments
of one to two, up to five milligrams of intravenous morphine sulfate. We can titrate the dose.
And as I said, beta blockers to maintain a heart rate below 60, provided you don't have heart
block. Anti-platelet therapy for non-stemming, everybody gets aspirin, a whole tablet to chew,
then 100 milligrams daily for the rest of their lives. We will give clopidigrel
for a minimum of 12 months. So dual anti-platelet therapy, aspirin and clopidigrel,
minimum of 12 months, at the end of 12 months, we stop clopidigrel and we continue aspirin for life.
And here there's a third intravenous anti-platelet therapy that's available to us.
It's called a glycoprotein 2B3, a receptor antagonist. It's the intravenous drug that's
--- page 29 ---
very potent that we use selectively, either in the CCU or during bailout when we're performing
angioplasty or stenting. In non-stemies, we also give the patient either noxyparin or hiprin.
And as soon as the troponin comes back, early on when the patient's acutely admitted the troponin
may be normal and we repeat troponin levels thereafter at three hours after first contact
with patient, then six hours after first contact with patients. And over time, if it is a non-stemial,
the troponin level would rise. We are very dependent on troponin levels to risk study
by a patient with non-stemie. And a higher risk is anybody who has troponin innovation.
This type of patient will be considered according to the angioplasty or stenting.
Again, then to summarize, in non-stemie, we give everybody aspirin, clopidigrel,
enoxoperin or hiprin. As I mentioned earlier, enoxoperin, because while patients are transferred
from peripheral hospitals to Albert Lutuli, it's easier to use enoxoperin, which is given BD
subcut instead of hiprin, which is IV infusion and may need to be discontinued in the ambulance,
and hiprin needs to be monitored. Everybody gets this therapy. If your high risk meaning,
your troponins are positive. Sometimes you have ST changes. Then you go to the
cathia for angiography and revascularization. If you're low risk, it means serial troponins.
You've done three, four troponins. They're all normal and there's no further pain. There's no
ECG changes. Then they are treated with just risk factor control with aspirin, and we will do a
stress test effectively. My last slide just captures from low risk to high risk, looking at
symptoms, ECG, troponins and diagnosis. Low risk is if you have very localized pain
anterior chest. Then some people complain of back pain, interscapular pain. Even higher risk is
if you have central chest pain or epigastric pain. Some patients have anterior chest pain,
radiating to both arms, epigastric, the throat and the jaw, and then you have the final type of
patient who is a resuscitated cardiac arrest or in cardiogenic shock. So this is a spectrum of
presentation and symptoms. The ECG, normal in unstable angina, normal in non-states.
Then the higher risk is if you manage to see ST segment depression and the worse the ST
--- page 30 ---
depression, the higher the risk. So if you see ST depression, then that's pointing to a non-stem.
The moment you see ST elevation, that's a STEMI and that's an emergency. Then what helps us are the
troponins. If you have very localized pain, your ECG is normal. Your troponins are negative,
not only the initial troponin, but subsequent troponin levels at hour three, hour six.
That rules out acute myocardial infarction and may even point to a non-cardia cause.
Whereas if you have more typical symptoms, anterior chest or classic radiation,
you have ST depression, the higher the troponin level. These are non-stems. You call them unstable,
if the troponin is negative, if they're positive, they are non-stems, they're admitted to the ICU
and simple angiography. Whereas if you have ST elevation, you don't wait for the troponin level.
That is a STEMI and you act on it as an emergency with your either performing primary PCR or in
our case, we administer piperinolysis, but with the dual antiplatelet therapy, would they not
compare? Once that's given, you then phone out the glutuli to get the patient once stabilized
for an angiogram and to see the condition of the artery where the angioplasty instinct is needed.
On discharge, every patient with acute coronary syndrome
will get dual antiplatelet therapy for one year. Aspirin indefinitely, everybody gets lipid learning.
EF below 40%, they all get ACE inhibitors and most importantly, you manage risk factors to
these therapeutic tungus. Thank you.
