--- page 11 ---
G is the ST segment. That
is the P-wave, that is atrial depolarization, the QRS, which is ventricular depolarization,
and after the S-wave, you get this ST segment and then the T-wave.
It is the ST segment that really helps us when we try to make a diagnosis of coronary artery disease.
This top ECG shows that this ST segment is isoelectric with the baseline. This is normal.
If the baseline is here and the ST segment is depressed, and here we can see depressed by one,
two, three little small squares, and it's horizontal ST depression. So any depression
in excess of one millimeter, and especially if it's horizontal, that is highly suggestive
of underlying coronary obstruction. But the most important and ominous is ST elevation,
because ST elevation myocardial infarction is a medical emergency, where the myocyte is under
threat, and after five minutes, if there is no blood supply and oxygen delivery, the myocyte
and myocytes begin to die. So ST segment elevation and especially convex ST elevation.
In the limb leads, limb leads are leads one, two, three, AVR, AVL, AVF. All you need is one millimeter.
That means one little small square above the baseline or in the pre-chordial leads,
meaning the chest leads, we want to be six. There's more than two millimeter ST segment
concave elevation. That is highly suggestive of an ST elevation myocardial infarction
which is, as I said, a medical emergency. So again, this is a R-rave, an ST elevation that is
earlier on, and later on, the R-rave is completely lost and you get a deep QA
and residual ST elevation. So when we see deep QAves, we know that that part of the heart
has completely infected and the ST elevation is just a residual
change that you see once the vessel is completely occluded.
This is an ECG of somebody who is having an anterior ST elevation myocardial infarction.
We see ST elevation in leads V1, V2, V3, V4. This pattern of ST elevation is called tombstock.
It looks like a tombstock. It's marked. It's not two millimeters. This is like 5, 10, almost 15
millimeters of ST elevation. The anterior leads are V1 to V6 as well as one in AVL.
--- page 12 ---
So depending way in the coronary artery, the vessel is blocked. It may be in the entire
anterior segment, which is one AVL V1 to V6, or it could be just in the septal leads or V6, V5, V6,
the apical leads. When you get ST segment elevation infarction, you often get reciprocal ST depression
in the opposite leads. So if you're having an anterior infar, what may help you confirm that
there is a problem you get reciprocal ST depression in the inferior leads. Now in this case, you get
ST segment elevation in the inferior leads, which leads to 3 and AVL, and you get reciprocal ST
depression in the anterior leads, which is one AVL. You can see it ST depression V1
and to a less extent in V2. But the important thing to note is the ST elevation in the inferior
leads. So this is an inferior impact, and that is how the ECG can be very helpful.
Okay. To diagnose an infarct, where it's a permanent ST elevation, to help you diagnose
a non-ST elevation where it could be transient, or in a patient with so-called stable angina,
who is at higher risk. If you do, for example, an exercise stress test, which may be demonstrating
a normal ECG when you start when the patient is at risk, is at risk, but with progressive
exercise, as heart rate and blood pressure and effort increases, you may get transient ST elevation,
and that's an indication to immediately stop because you can provoke infarction.
So we use the exercise stress test to help us establish a diagnosis if there's any doubt,
it also helps us determine a risk of a coronary event. By that, we mean there are seven stages
to an exercise stress test. The standard protocol we use is a Brusport protocol,
where every three minutes the treadmill goes faster and the incline increases. So everybody
should be able to at least complete stages one and two. So stage one is three minutes,
it's walking on the flat at the low pace. Stage two is still very slight incline and walking at
the slightly faster pace. Most individuals should be able to complete stage one stage two,
which is six minutes of exercise. If you're unable to do six minutes, then you're very
compromised and the test may not be helpful, but then it also gives you an indication
that this patient is very deconditioned or has a significant underlying clinical disease.
--- page 13 ---
It's important to mention that the exercise stress test is not of value in patients at very
high risk or very low risk. By very high risk, if you've got an angina-addressed typical symptoms
and you have multiple risk factors, by performing an exercise stress test, you can provoke an
ischemic event such as an acute coronary syndrome. Or if you have chest pain in a very young individual,
you're 20, a female, you've got absolutely no risk factor. The chest pain then is likely due to
something else. You may have a viral infection, whether it's a flu and if it's a bad flu that
goes on to a pericarditis that may mimic ischemic chest pain or may at times even have concave
ST elevation. The exercise stress test is not of much value or not very safe and very high risk,
and as I say, if you're young and don't have any risk factors, it's not much point in
performing an exercise stress test. Will you interpret an exercise stress test?
You should look at symptoms because most patients, we said angina or ischemic chest pain is provoked
by exercise. So, if you get chest pain, typical chest pain, while you're exercising, that will
help you with the diagnosis. If you're unable to exercise for at least six minutes, we know you
likely have a problem unless you're very unfit. We look at hemodynamic response, by that we mean
heart rate and blood pressure. The more you exercise, the progressive increase you have in
blood pressure. If your blood pressure begins to fall, you know, that's an ominous indication,
or you're unable to increase your heart rate, then that is also problematic.
And most importantly, what we look out for when we're doing an exercise stress test
are ECG changes. And the most important ECG changes, as I mentioned, is ST settle and deviation,
either elevation, which is ominous, or depression. And if the depression is more than
one and a half to two millimeters, we stop the exercise stress test.
Now, how do we manage honey conery syndrome stable angina? The aim is to prevent my cardelian
function and delaying death. So, that's the most important aim. And obviously, you want to improve
quality of life, and therefore, we try to improve symptoms.
How do we prevent my cardelian infection and delay death? Importantly, we use anti-platelet
--- page 14 ---
drugs. As I mentioned in our slides on pathology, you have a plaque, but the plaque ruptures to cause
an inclusive fungus. So, it's important to have anti-platelet therapy, because the plaque can
rupture at any time. And the anti-platelet therapy keeps the blood a bit more liquid,
giving you a slightly better chance of not forming an inclusive fungus. Anti-platelet
drugs are aspirin. And a second anti-platelet drug that we often use in the setting of acute
conery syndromes is called clopidogrel. There are several drugs in this class. They belong to
a type of drug called ADP receptor antagonist or a P2Y drug receptor antagonist. These are synonyms.
So, anti-platelet drugs to prevent plaque formation and the clot that includes the artery.
Lipid learning agents, very important, because they address the underlying plaque. If you aggressively
treat hyperlipidemia, you can have retraction of a plaque. The most important drug class here
are the statins. If you are unable to get to therapeutic targets with the statin, we then use
another type of agent called azetamide. And if that still doesn't get you to therapeutic targets,
then we use a newer class of agents called the PCSK9 inhibitors. There are several newer drugs
that help with lipoglobin. Beta blockers, we don't use it in all patients, but we use it in
patients who have sustained a big infant and have some degree of LV dysfunction. By that,
we mean an ejection fraction of less than 40%. And we also use beta blockers as an anti-anginal drug
because beta blockers lower heart rate. And by lowering heart rate, they reduce myocardial
oxygen demand. The slower your heart rate, the less fast the heart has to beat. And beta blockers
also reduce the force of contractility. So, the less force of contractility, the lower the oxygen
requirement. So, for those reasons, in those who have very high heart rates or who have angina,
beta blockers will also help. And if you have impaired LV function,
beta blockers may help prevent or delay death, not prevent, but delay death. We use ACE inhibitors
in those who help a large inbox with LV dysfunction. And LV dysfunction is an ejection fraction,
generally below 40%. I've just put up this slide to give you an idea
that each class of drug contributes to a delaying death and prevention of infection.
--- page 15 ---
But these are hazard ratios from trials, but these trials don't always look at the uniform
outcome. So, some look at vascular death, some look at heart attack stroke or all cause death,
others just at all cause death alone. So, if your hazard ratio is 77, that means aspirin has a
33% chance of preventing a vascular death. If you use another anti-platelet agent,
if the hazard ratio is 0.93, that means it's a 7% reduction in myocardial infarction stroke or
all cause death. But just to give you an idea of anti-platelet agents, anti-combotic agents,
ACE inhibitors, angiotents and receptor blockers, beta blockers, statins and anti-inflammatory
agents all individually contribute to reduction in mortality. And why often a patient who has
coronary artery disease is on multiple drugs because each one works in a different manner.
What are contemporary disease modifying therapies? I mentioned lipid lowering, statins are vital
there in the first line, but they're a whole host of newer lipid lowering therapies. The PCSK9
inhibitors, bampadoric acid and a drug that works against hypertriglycerideemia called
ecosapent ethone, and that helps reduce triglycerides. Then, because atherosclerosis
is an inflammatory process, there is much work going on. They chose the benefit of inflammatory
modulators. And these are drugs that are called Zolte-Vecumab, Canumab, Holtercy,
and the common drug use for gout are anti-inflammatories. The newer diabetic agents,
GLP1 agonists and the SGLT2 inhibitors, although they are diabetic drugs, they have
definitely been shown to improve prognosis, even in patients who have a secondary, in
cases of secondary prevention. Then, the renin angiotensinldosterone inhibitors,
and these are menoralloporticoid receptor antagonists, the ACE inhibitors, and the angiotensin receptor
blockers. And as I've mentioned, any antiplatelet or anti-thrombotic agent, in addition to aspirin,
the P2Y12 inhibitors, and low dose anti-gradulation in certain trials have shown prognostic benefits.
And modifying underlying coronary artery disease.
Now, in addition to improving prognosis, the patient needs to feel better. So, in order to
improve symptoms, we give oral nitrates. You may know nitrates as TNT. You can either spray it,
--- page 16 ---
or you can use it under your tongue, or you can use a tablet that's long acting. We use beta
blockers and anti-anginal therapies to lower heart rate, lower blood pressure, and lower the
force of lip ventricular contractility, thus reducing myocardial oxygen demand. We aim for
a resting heart rate below 60. By that, we mean in the 50s. The heart rate in the 50s is what we
aim for, a heart rate at rest. If patients are unable to tolerate a beta blocker, and this may
happen in patients who have severe asthma, or severe obstructive airways disease,
then we may have to use alternative therapies, such as calcium antagonist.
And these calcium antagonists are the non-dihydroperidine calcium antagonist called
ltiazem and borapamol, because they also reduce heart rate, reduce blood pressure,
and also reduce the force of LV contractility.
Then you've got to look out for aggravating factors that reduce myocardial oxygen supply,
or increase oxygen demand. Conditions that reduce oxygen supply, obviously, if you're anemic.
Oxygen is largely carried by hemoglobin. So if you're anemic,
but the hemoglobin below eight, that's going to compromise cellular myocyte oxygen delivery.
And often, patients use multiple drugs, in addition to aspirin and clopidograph,
older individuals commonly use non-steroidals, or over-the-counter drugs,
like trenpa headache powder, flu medicines, which contain high amounts of aspirin or non-steroidals.
And they may have unrecognized GI bleeding. So you need to keep the hemoglobin at an adequate
level. If you have obstructive airways disease, then your oxygen saturation is not optimal.
Ideally, we want oxygen saturations to be above 95%, so supplemental oxygen will have to be given.
Then there are conditions that increase myocardial oxygen demand. If you have infections, for example,
it's not uncommon for patients in an ICU to be anemic, to have poor oxygen saturation,
to have underlying sepsis. So infection, uncontrolled high blood pressure,
aortic stenosis, hypothyroidism, morbid obesity, all of these make the heart
either beat faster or contract harder, and thereby increase myocardial oxygen demand.
--- page 17 ---
And these need to be attended to as part of the overall strategy in treating patients.
This is perhaps the most important slide in the management of coronary syndrome or stable
angina. Absolutely, stop smoking. That's why, as we've said, we've had public smoking. We could
cause it increases the risk of infection and death in persons we have never smoked.
So you need to stop smoking. And the benefits of stopping smoking
often outweigh the benefit of treating every other risk factor. Ideally, your blood pressure
should be less than 13080, especially in diabetics. But in older individuals, if you're in the new
70s or 80s, we're quite happy with the blood pressure from 14980 below. But you aim for blood
pressure around 13080. Your LDL cholesterol must be less than one common form. We use multiple
lipid lowering agents to get to this therapeutic target. Ideal diabetic control must be an HVA1C
less than 7%. If you're extremely fully controlled with the HVA1C of 11, 12, and 13,
then we aim for HVA1C of initially down to eight. And if you tolerate that and don't become hypoglycemic,
then we go for tactile control. But if you can help it, HVA1C less than 7% lifestyle changes,
BMI less than 25, regular exercise. By regular exercise, we mean endurance training.
Endurance training, we say, for 30 minutes, for five days of the week. Resistance training is
important to increase muscle mass, because muscle mass and muscle is responsible for glucose uptake.
So, though endurance exercise benefits the heart, maintaining muscle mass by resistance training
also helps with glucose uptake and hopefully avoiding obesity. A diet of whole grain,
vegetable, and fruit is recommended. If we institute all of these factors and the patients
remain severely symptomatic, by that we mean we've got them on anti-platelet therapy on statins.
We've controlled blood pressure, diabetes, we've stopped smoking, but the patient still has
class three to four angina, then we are obliged to undertake coronary angiography
in order to mechanically relieve the obstruction. So, as I said, severe symptoms,
class three to four, despite medical treatment, you proceed to coronary angiography. If the patient
has put his deemed high risk on stress testing, and this is regardless of the severity of angina,
--- page 18 ---
by high risk, we mean this ST segment changes early on during exercise stress testing,
by that we mean before stage two, or there's a drop in blood pressure, or there's very
marked ST segment depression. These patients must go on to angiography, otherwise they will include.
Obviously, patients who have survived sudden cardiac arrest or a serious ventricular arrhythmia.
These are patients who have been resuscitated by bystanders, either the ventricular arrhythmia
or cardiac arrest, these kinds of patients go immediately to angiography. And lastly,
patients who have angina and who have evidence of LV dysfunction, that means that the
part of the heart muscle has already been damaged by vessel occlusion. And if normal
LV function, complete normality is EF, ejection fraction above 60%, above 50% we tolerate,
but below 40% is clearly LV dysfunction. So if you have angina, your LV function is already
compromised. So that kind of patient will go on to coronary angiography, because if another vessel
includes, then that may lead to further reduction in ejection fraction of death.
So these patients, at high risk, severely symptomatic, will give us killer rights.
How do we do that? The majority of patients undergo percutaneous coronary intervention,
what we call angioplocity of stenting, or in the minority who are unsuitable for
percutaneous coronary intervention, then they go for bypass surgery.
We're done with chronic coronary syndromes, or stable angina, and now we're going to speak
briefly about acute coronary syndromes.
The acute coronary syndromes are divided to estelivation myocardial
infarction, what we call STEMI, non-estelivation acute coronary syndrome, called non-STEMI,
or unstable angina. StemI, to emphasize there's a plaque that's in there for years. It's a thumbus
that causes total occlusion, and the total occlusion, because of its totality,
is a medical emergency. The difference between STEMI and a non-STEMI is that the thumbus that
forms on an ulcerated plaque aggravates this occlusion, but there is still some
patency for blood to flow. So although it's urgent, it's not emergent as in STEMI.
--- page 19 ---
In STEMI, the vessel is occluded and the aim of therapy is rapid reperfusion
and maintaining patency of the vessel. That means you need to open this vessel and you need to keep
it on. The most important factor about management of STEMI is the total ischemic time.
By total ischemic time, we mean the time from symptom onset to opening up the occluded vessel.
Ideally, the total ischemic time must be less than three hours. That's when you save lives,
that's when you save myocyte and prevent further myocyte necrosis, and the greatest benefit
of any therapy is to have the vessel open within three hours of the onset of chest pain.
And by what we mean onset of chest pain, sometimes you have a stuttering in fact.
You may have ischemic type of chest pain for 10 minutes or so, it goes away.
But the timing of STEMI is the onset of the continuous pain. Pain may start,
you may have it intermittently, but you time STEMI from the onset of the pain that is most severe
and ongoing and ongoing beyond 30 minutes. So the diagnosis most importantly is a symptom,
typical in China ongoing for over 30 minutes. MEI ischemic pain ongoing for 30 minutes should
be considered an in part. And you need to have ECG evidence of ST innovation.
We are highly reliant on troponin, but in order to institute appropriate therapy,
in ST elevation myocardial infarction, we do not wait, I cannot emphasize this more,
we cannot wait for the troponin level to return from the laboratory, because it may take several
hours or in the rural situation, it may take several days. So the diagnosis of STEMI is based
on two factors alone. Typical angina with the pain that's ongoing for 30 minutes. Remember
it's stable angina, you have pain that's five minutes. Here the pain is ongoing for 30 minutes
and you have ST elevation. The troponin level, you send off the blood, it'll come back later
and take you you've had in part. But to act and diagnose in the acute situation, those are the
only two conditions you're looking for. So if you have chest pain more than 30 minutes,
you see ST elevation greater than one millimeter in the limb leads or greater than two millimeters
in the chest leads. Or if this new bundle branch block, you proceed immediately to deep
--- page 20 ---
perfusion. Just to emphasize, again, this is the tombstorming of very exaggerated ST elevation
that you're seeing anti-values. If for instance, the patient comes to you very early and you are
uncertain of ST elevation, it is absolutely incumbent on the attending physician to repeat
the ECG every 10 minutes until they see clear gut ST elevation and then immediately act on it.
So if a patient has ongoing ischemic chest pain, comes in perhaps early and ST elevation is not
very obvious. You repeat the ECG every 10 minutes until you see the ST elevation or the pain subsides.
And if you're unable to interpret the ECG, please use modern technology, whether it's WhatsApp or
whatever kind of messaging to get hold of a physician or cardiologist who will help you interpret.
So for reperfusion, what do we mean by that? The best form of reperfusion is primary
and duplasty or stenting. That means you need to get the patient as an emergency to the cath lab
and in the cath lab, we put down the wire balloon, then stand the artery and open it. In the skilled
hands, you get 95% success rate with angioplasty. The problem with angioplasty is access to the
cath lab in the public or state health setting for Zule Natal in the entire province. Albert Luturi
is the only institution that offers angioplasty or stenting for the public.
Therefore, second best, if you're unable to get to the cath lab, timeously, you undertake
fibranolysis. And the fibranolysis, you can give up until 12 hours following the onset of chest pain
and in some instances, even beyond 12 hours, patients got ongoing chest pain and there is
a st elevation. But as a rule, an ideal is obviously within three hours, but we administer fibranolysis
up until 12 hours of the onset of chest pain. We have three types of agents, stiptokinase,
autoplase and tenectoplase. Stiptokinase is the cheapest and most easily accessible. You infuse
the drug over one hour. Autoplase is a bit more powerful with greater efficacy than stiptokinase.
It's also given as an infusion, a bit complex regimen. You'll get more familiar with it in
your clinical years, but the best pubranolutic agent is tenectoplase. The reason why we pre