--- page 1 ---
worldwide. The most recent global mortality statistics by the World Health Organization,
which was done in 2019, indicates that cardiovascular disease at the top bar graph in gray by far
is the commonest cause of mortality accounting for 18 and a half million deaths annually.
The second commonest cause of death is cancer at 10 million. And then we go to the respiratory
diseases at just under four million. And you would notice that infectious diseases, which
are the more prevalent causes in low-income countries, tuberculosis, just over a million
deaths annually, and AIDS just under 900,000. The point to emphasize is that in South Africa,
as in many low- and middle-income countries, has a double burden of disease. On the one hand,
infectious diseases, and on the other, diseases of lifestyle or non-communicable diseases,
which are becoming highly prevalent in middle and low-income countries. Just to put things in
perspective, even during the COVID era, which accounted for a marked increase in global mortality,
if you take statistics done at the end of 2021, ischemic heart disease even in the COVID era accounted
for over 15 million deaths, followed by stroke, which constitutes part of cardiovascular diseases,
accounting for just under 11% of deaths, and COVID-19 at just under 10%. So even in the COVID era,
cardiovascular diseases remained the commonest cause of global mortality.
A coronary artery disease is also known as ischemic heart disease, and amongst the cardiovascular diseases,
coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death globally, individually responsible for 16%
of total deaths. Not only is coronary artery disease the commonest cause of death, the most lethal
manifestation of coronary artery disease is heart attacks, or what we term myocardial infarction,
and which is a medical emergency. What's important to know is that coronary artery disease is a
disease of lifestyle that can be modified, either by choices you make, the way you live in terms of
diet and physical activity, but it can also be modified by pharmacological therapies, as well as
mechanical therapies, what we call rivascularization, by means of angioplasty and stenting, or by past
surgery. So there are multiple ways in which we manage the condition, but the point to emphasize is
that it is a disease of lifestyle. If we lead a judicious life and would moderate contingencies in
--- page 2 ---
terms of dietary choices and physical activity, you can, to a large extent, delay the onset or
prevent coronary artery disease. What are the clinical manifestations of coronary artery disease?
The commonest is what we call stable angina, but it's now called a chronic coronary syndrome,
and the reason why it's called chronic coronary syndrome, the disease starts in the early teen years,
some believe even in neutral, depending on the mother's choice of diet, but certainly during times
of war, when young individuals die, mostly those who are 19 and 20 years old, post-mortem performed
on these individuals already show the early markings of disease in the form of atherosclerotic
blocks. But the disease becomes manifest usually in the middle years, generally after the age of 35,
and most commonly between the ages of 50, 60, 70, and 80 years. So we call it a previously stable
angina, but now we refer to it as a chronic coronary syndrome. The second manifestation is acute
coronary syndrome, and the most devastating manifestation that is treatable is a heart attack,
what we call a ST elevation myocardial infarction. Also amongst the acute coronary syndromes are
what we call non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome or non-ST elevation myocardial infarction.
It is an in fact, but it is not so time dependent in terms of prognosis as ST elevation.
And the third category amongst the acute coronary syndromes is unstable angina. For practical purposes,
any person who experiences ischemic type chest pain or angina for the very first time is labeled
unstable until we know the cause that the patient manifests.
Pardon the artery disease can manifest a silent ischemia, which is detected either on an exercise
stress test and an ECG or at times imaging modalities such as CT scans of the coronary
arteries, which can show plaque deposition or a coronary vessel occlusion.
The last manifestation is sudden cardiac death. A proportion of patients will present with cardiac
arrest and will succumb. And a category is what we call resuscitated cardiac arrest. So these are
generally the manifestations of coronary artery disease.
Importantly, they are risk factors. Because as I've mentioned, this is a disease of lifestyle
and the risk factors are classified into non-modifiable and modifiable.
--- page 3 ---
But the modifiable risk factors is age.
A coronary artery disease prevalence increases after the age of 35 years.
And the lifetime risk of developing the disease in men after the age of 40 years is 49%.
That means a man has a almost 50% chance of developing coronary artery disease after the age
of 40 years and a female about 32% will go on to develop coronary artery disease in later years.
So the older you are, the more likely you are to have the condition. Men are at an increased
risk compared to women, but once women reach the menopause, the prevalence becomes equivalent
between both genders. Ethnicity in our locality is certainly the Indian population is at increased
risk. But other groups such as the Afrikaans population, who has familial hypodemia
or certain sectors of the Jewish community of Ashkenazi descent or even people of Scottish descent.
So there are certainly certain groups and certain ethnicities that have an increased risk.
Family history is important. A family history of coronary artery disease below the age of 50 years
indicates an increased risk of mortality from coronary artery disease. And this is a more pronounced
in the male gender. If your father or brother was diagnosed with coronary artery disease before
the age of 55 years, or your mother or sister diagnosed before 65 years of age, these are considered
additional risk factors in that individual. Then they are modifiable risk factors,
which are highly dependent, as I said earlier, on lifestyle choices.
Hypertension being the most prevalent. Approximately one out of every three
individuals globally have hypertension. Hypodemia is the second most common risk factor.
And then diabetes mellitus. Type 2 diabetes as well as type 1, diabetes increases the rate of
coronary artery disease by more than two and a half times compared to those without diabetes.
So to emphasize, although hypertension and hypodemia may be more common,
diabetes is a more severe condition, making an individual more prone to the disease,
as well as having poorer outcomes once the individual has coronary artery disease. Obesity
in itself is an independent risk factor. And obesity also increases the risk of developing
--- page 4 ---
the other risk factors that we've mentioned. The more likelihood you are having hypertension,
hypodemia and type 2 diabetes. Smoking, that's well known. Non-smokers who are
exposed to secondhand smoking have a 25 to 30% increased risk of coronary artery disease,
compared to those who have never been exposed to cigarette smoking. Therefore,
we ban smoking in public areas, not to protect the smoker, but to protect the non-smoker.
Poor diet and importantly, it's added sugar and that comes in the form of common things such as
soft drinks and sweetened beverages. And just consuming this on a regular basis is associated
with more than a 20% higher risk of myocardial infarct. Certainly saturated and trans fats,
as well as an excess of red meat or processed meats. Processed meats are sausage along
all these fancy Hollywood chops and the likes because the fat content in these diets are really
high. And importantly, as well is a sedentary lifestyle. So these are all the body fiber
risk factors that as we said, by leading a judicious lifestyle, you can avoid having the
source factors and decrease your overall incidence of coronary artery disease. Also, other less
recognized risk factors. Firstly, is non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease or sciatic hepatitis is now considered the commonest cause of cirrhosis in the world.
And it is directly related to obesity and especially abdominal obesity.
Individuals who have chronic kidney disease certainly have a higher incidence of coronary artery disease.
And once you reach the point of dialysis, the chances of dying of coronary artery disease
exceed the risk of dying from chronic kidney disease per se. Inflammatory conditions also
increase risk of coronary artery disease because coronary artery disease in itself is an underlying
inflammatory process. Inflammatory conditions commonly associated as systemic lupus, rheumatoid,
inflammatory bowel disease, and importantly also HIV infection. The infection in itself
leading to increase thrombosis or vasculitis affecting the endothelia or HIV drug therapy
which leads to abnormalities in metabolic conditions such as hypo-epidemia and diabetes.
We have a risk cause that help us assess an individual's risk of developing
--- page 5 ---
coronary artery disease. We have this risk of charts because as I said, the disease is usually
manifest in your later years but the risk starts early. So these risk scores, they are many but
one of the oldest is the Framingham, takes into consideration several risk factors which is age,
total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, systolic blood pressure with a treated or untreated
and also considering where the patient is a smoker.
And then it gives you a 10-year likelihood of developing total cardiovascular disease
which includes coronary artery disease, stroke, and peripheral artery disease.
But these risk scores are not very useful in diabetics for those who, for example,
have familial hypo-epidemia because just by the mere fact of having diabetes
and familial hypo-epidemia, you immediately are at higher risk of developing coronary
artery disease. So there's no point in scoring with the Framingham risk assessment chart.
And just to give you an idea of what the chart looks like, you can get it online
on the left hand side before the male gender, on the right female gender.
And if your blood pressure, for example, is completely normal with systolic less than 120,
you get minus 2 points, but the points increase incrementally with the greater
the severity of blood pressure. For example, if a blood pressure is about 140, you get 2,
but if it's about 160, you get 3 points. Similarly, if you're on treatment, if you're a smoker
and looking at all these risk factors, as I said, it's clearly available,
it helps the individual practitioner, especially at the primary care level in deciding if the
individual is at higher risk or very high risk, then you can institute preventative measures.
And if you look at the score, if your score is less than 3, you're low risk, it's less than 15,
you're at moderate risk, but the moment your total points are more than 15 and especially
more than 30, then we institute pharmacotherapy in addition to lifestyle measures to
rigidly control the risk factors in order to minimize your risk of myocardial infarction and death.
Individuals who are at very high risk of cardiovascular events do not require
--- page 6 ---
risk scoring, as I've mentioned. If an individual has established a
prosclerotic disease, remember the heart and the coronary vascular literature is just one
vascular bit. The exact same disease process can give you cerebrovascular disease or stroke and
TIA or peripheral arterial disease, which is gangrene and predication, as well as
aneurysms in the aorta. So if you have established a prosclerotic disease in one vascular bit,
the likelihood of you having it in another vascular bit is high. So there's no point in
individually risk scoring because your overall risk is high. If you have type 2 diabetes
plus other risk factors, and this is common in the population, type 2 diabetes coupled with
smoking or hypertension or dysepademia, or the mere fact that if you're diabetic and above the
age of 40, you're already at high risk. If you have type 1 diabetes with any degree of protonuria,
you're at high risk. If you have genetic or familial hyperlipidemia, which is common in our
paphycana population of Dutch descent in South Africa, we have about 300,000 individuals. We
have severe familial hyperlipidemia, and this means total cholesterol in excess of 7.5 millimolts
per liter or an LDL cholesterol, LDL being the bad cholesterol in excess of 5 millimolts per liter,
that automatically puts you at high risk. If you have severe chronic kidney disease,
and by that we mean more than stage 4, stage 4 is GFR, less than 30 millimeters per liter,
or stage 5, where your GFR is less than 15, what we term end-stage renal disease, you are also at
high risk, very high risk of coronary artery disease. And lastly, asymptomatic individuals
who may have CT scans for other reasons, whether it's lung disease or looking at abdominal CT scan,
and they are atherosclerotic plaques demonstrated not only in the coronary vasculature, but other
areas, and the common other areas are the aorta, and a knuckle of the aorta, or in the infra-renal
abdominal aorta, which is the commonest site of atherosclerosis. And x-rays or CT scans can
pick up a calcification or plaques at these sites.
Now, just to emphasize the pathology, that's why we call it chronic coronary syndrome,
because the disease is silent for many years, and as I indicated, evidence of fatty streak,
--- page 7 ---
which is lipid deposition within, this is a cross-section of a coronary artery, and this is a
longitudinal section. The yellow bit is the plaque, which is lipid and inflammatory cells
and smooth muscle cells that collect in the war of vessel and lead to progressive narrowing of vessel.
And in the early years, and this is in your teen years, in your 20s, in your 30s, you already
have disease, but this is clinically silent. But having said that, it's not uncommon in our
environment to see young individuals, you know, because of the prevalence of obesity starting very
early in the early teen years, and when you're obese, the accompanying elevation in blood pressure,
or being diabetic or prediabetic, we are seeing individuals, and the youngest I've seen is a 19
year old with a heart attack. We've sent several individuals in their 20s for bypass, and we regularly
perform stenting as well. So in the early years, the early teens, most people have the fatty streak.
Then the plaque, as you enter your middle years, you get your late 30s, 40s, 50s, the plaque grows,
and impinges more on the lumen of the vessel and narrows the vessel. It's only once the vessel
is 70% narrowed. Do you get clinical manifestation of ischemic heart disease? And the commonest
manifestation is ischemic chest pain, what we call angina. So that occurs pretty late in the course
of this disease. And finally, acute coronary syndrome, which makes the patient most vulnerable
to death, is when the plaque ruptures, and when it ruptures, thrombus is formed. And as you see,
the yellow is the plaque with the lipid and inflammatory cell, and the red is the thrombus.
The thrombus is the final harbinger of total vessel occlusion, and if the vessel is occluded,
there's no downstream blood flow, and the myocytes downstream die, and that is myocardial infarct.
So the point to emphasize is this is decades in the making. And in the early years, with the
judicious lifestyle and lifestyle choices, you can delay the onset or prevent onset of coronary
artery disease and infarction. Again, just to emphasize, in the early years,
it's lipid and lymphocytes and smooth muscle cells, then this plaque ruptures, and it can form a
clot. The clot can be small, in which case the body can take root, get rid of it, or it can be
totally occlusive, blocking the entire lumen of the vessel. And if there's no blood supply and no
--- page 8 ---
oxygen downstream of the vessel, that part of the heart will die. If you're lucky, it will heal,
and would therapy the vessel may be patent, it's not normal. Emphasizing again,
treatment of this disease, it's lifelong. Now, chronic coronary syndrome,
we have a plaque, and as I've mentioned, the plaque has a lipid and the inflammatory cells,
and the plaque has to cause more than 50 or 70% lumen stenosis to limit blood flow downstream,
and that will then manifest with ischemic chest pain or angina. In acute coronary syndromes,
in stemi, the thrombus that forms on the plaque is large, it causes total occlusion of the vessel.
That then becomes an emergency, because there's no blood flow downstream,
and everything downstream will then begin to die, and the more proximal the occlusion,
the bigger the impact, and the more ominous the prognosis. That is what we call acetylubation.
In non-acetylubation acute coronary syndrome, the pathology is identical. This plaque that has
been there for a long time may fissure rupture, a thrombus is formed, but here you're lucky in
that the thrombus is not all occlusive. The 50 or 70% stenosis can become a 90% stenosis,
but there is still some blood flow. So although you need to attend through this relatively
urgently, it's not as an emergent condition as a stemi. The mechanism of infarction here
is that bits of the clot break off and block off downstream smaller vessels.
Now returning to chronic coronary syndromes, as I said, the first indicator of coronary artery
disease is angina, and this occurs in 50% of patients. What do we mean by stable angina or
chronic coronary syndrome? The definition of stable angina is that the symptom characteristics
are unchanged for the preceding 60 days. I point this out to emphasize the difference between
stable angina and unstable angina. Here, chronic coronary syndrome refers to stable angina,
where the pattern of pain has not changed for the preceding 60 days. We diagnose angina by history
and history alone. To emphasize angina is a diagnosis made on history, and in the next slide,
I'll describe what we mean by angina. A 12-lead ECG may help. It may show a previous impact,
or you can do a 12-lead ECG when you're exercising or any form of stress, and the
--- page 9 ---
greater the amount of exercise, the greater the ischemic requirements or the ischemic burden on the heart,
and even though the ECG may start up normal with progressive exercise and more effort,
you can get changes on the ECG. And the commonest stress test we do is the treadmill exercise
stress test. We can use pharmacological stress with the rutamine, or we can do nuclear stress tests.
We can also diagnose chronic coronary syndromes by CT, coronary angioplative. That looks at the
plaque burden within a coronary artery, and it can also quantify the percentage stenosis,
as well as comment on the amount of calcium within the vessel.
Now, I said angina is a diagnosis made on history and history alone. What do we mean by typical angina?
Typical angina. It's very likely to have obstructive coronary artery disease.
The patient describes the chest pain, which is not necessarily pain. Therefore, we refer to it as
discomfort, as a constriction in the front of the chest, and it may radiate to the neck,
the jaw, the shoulder, the left arm, or both arms. So it's the type of pain,
it's more constriction, and the pattern of radiation, that's one component. The second important component
is that the chest pain is provoked by physical exertion, or some form of emotional stress.
And it typically is relieved with rest, or with nitrates, which we spray into the mouth,
or take a tablet sublingually. It's rapidly relieved with nitrates within five minutes.
So typical angina has to satisfy all three criteria. The description of the pain, the pattern of
radiation being provoked by physical exertion being relieved by rest or nitrates.
Very quickly within five minutes, that is typical angina. A typical angina, which is
probable angina, you meet two of the above three criteria. And non-anginal chest pain,
when only one criterion of the formation three is satisfied.
We also trade the severity of angina as we trade the severity of dyspnea. This is similar, but
instead of being called the New York Art Association Classification of Dyspnea, this is the Canadian
cardiovascular society, creating of angina, and it's very similar. A great one is angina only with
a very strenuous exertion. Great two would moderate exertion,
--- page 10 ---
great three would mild exertion, and great voice angina at rest. So this is a universal terminology
that we use to convey the severity of angina. And on the right hand side, you can see common
descriptions of how we trade severity.
Also, in addition to the history taking in terms of diagnosing chronic coronary syndrome or
stable angina, there are clinical features that alert us to disease. Obviously, when we look at
a patient, the age, the older age, male, gender, certain ethnic groups as we mentioned. If you're
in a male in a middle age, then we know if you get chest pain, they always think of underlying
ischemic or coronary artery disease. The presence of risk factors further strengthens your hand
in making that diagnosis. So if the individual is 45, a male, smokes, is obese, and coupled with
hypertension, diabetes is a hyperlipidemia. The more the risk factors, the more likely
you are to have this disease. And obviously, if you have a presence of non-cordinately
atherosclerotic disease, meaning you have evidence of disease or occlusive disease in other vascular
bits, such as you may have had a previous stroke, or you have evidence of a carotid brewery,
indicating a transient ischemic attack, or you may have low limb chlorication indicating
peripheral vascular disease, or you may palpate an abdominal aortic aneurysm, or an ultrasound,
or some imaging modality may incidentally pick up an aortic aneurysm. So all of these clinical
factors should be looked for, because before you look at any investigate modality, it clearly
will help you and guide you in the right direction that the cause of this chest pain
is underlying ischemic heart disease. Now, the third way that we try to make the diagnosis and
confirm the diagnosis is with a 12-lead ECG. So what we look at in the EC