--- page 1 ---
Good day and welcome to this three recorded lecture regarding the basics of ECG interpretation.
We're going to go through the basic steps of ECG interpretation.
First, you've got to make sure that the ECG is calibrated correctly.
We then analyze the rate, the rhythm.
We work at the general axis of current.
And then we're going to look at each wave specifically and look at any abnormalities of morphology.
We look for any evidence of chamber dilatation and chamber hypertrophy that is evident on the ECG.
We'll then go through the stages of myocardial infarction on the ECG in any metabolic conditions that can affect your ECG tracing.
In terms of calibration, on the x-axis, you get that's a measure of time, which is measured in milliseconds.
The paper speed must be set at 25 millimeters per second so that each millimeter is 0.04 seconds or 40 milliseconds.
On the y-axis, that is amplitude or voltage, and every 10 millimeters is equivalent to 1 millivolts.
You then have to make sure that your electrodes are placed correctly.
We place 10 electrodes, which gives us 12 leads on the ECG.
First, we look at the limb leads, which are lead 1, lead 2, and lead 3.
Then there's the augmented limb leads, which are AVR, AVL, and AVF.
So each electrode is placed on the right arm, the left arm, and the left leg.
Then there's the pre-chordial leads, which are placed across the chest.
V1 is in the fourth intercostal space in the right-parastormal area.
V2 in the fourth intercostal space in the left-parastormal area.
V4 is in the fifth intercostal space in the metallivicular line, and V3 is placed between V2 and V4.
V6 is in the fifth intercostal space in the metoxillary line, and V5 is placed between V4 and V6.
The reason that you have 10 electrodes, but you get 12 leads, is because the standard limb leads,
1, 2, and lead 3 are bipolar leads, which means that they read the current measures between
two different electrodes.
So lead 1 reads between the right arm and the left arm, lead 2 between the right arm and
the left leg, and lead 3 between the left arm and the left leg.
And therefore you get that each lead is looking at the heart from a different direction.
Lead 3 leads 2, 3, and AVF are looking at the heart from the inferior direction.
So we call them the inferior leads.
1 and AVL are looking at the high lateral territory of the heart.
Lead V1 and V2 are looking at the septum of the heart, V3 and V4.
The anterior wall and V5 and V6 are looking at the lateral walls.
We then look at the rate, so we can calculate the rate by either counting the number of QRS complexes
in a 10 second ECG strip and multiplying it by 6.
If the rhythm is regular, you can also determine the rate by looking at the RR interval, which is
then counting the number of large blocks between two subsequent R waves and dividing that into 300.
We're then going to look at any abnormalities of rhythm.
So when the patient is in sinus rhythm, you get a P wave before every QRS complex
and every QRS complex will have a P wave before it.
The sign of atrial node acts as the natural pacemaker of the heart, and the rate is usually between 60 and 100.
--- page 2 ---
Importantly, the P wave is negative in AVR and positive in lead 2.
If you go back to looking at the hexaxial scale, you can see that in AVR it looks at the heart
from the direction of the left atrium at the base of the heart.
Lead 2 is looking at the heart in the direction of the apex.
So the P wave is always negative in AVR because the current of the direction of current in the heart
is going from the right atrium from the SA node down towards the apex.
So it's going away from AVR and towards lead 2.
Everything on the ECG that is going away from an electrode would be negative,
and if it's going towards an electrode, you get a positive wave.
And that's why in normal sinus rhythm, AVR will always have a negative P wave
and lead 2 always have a positive P wave.
And this video just shows you the way in which current moves within the heart.
The impulse is generated by the sino atrial node.
It's conducted through the atria via the intra atrial pathways to the AV node.
There's a slight delay in conduction, and then the impulse is transmitted down the bundle of hiss
to the right and left bundle branches and the perking system to depolarize the ventricles.
So the AV node causes a slight delay to allow the atria to first contract
and full the ventricles before the ventricles depolarize and contract.
In sinus bradycardia, the rate is less than 60, and you have normal sinus rhythm.
In sinus bradycardia may be due to certain drugs, such as the joxone, beta blockers
and calcium channel blockers that slow conduction within the heart.
It may also be found in athletes or Bigfoot individuals.
It can occur in cases of ischemia or myocardial infarction that involves the right coronary artery.
The right coronary artery supplies the sino atrial node and AV node,
and therefore those patients can have a bradycardia.
It's also found in hypothyroidism, hypothermia, certain electrolyte abnormalities,
and in parts of cushions triad, in rays, intracranial pressure.
Sinus tachycardia is when you have sinus rhythm, but the heart rate is between 100 and 150 per minute.
And it's often physiological and can be caused by anxiety, pain, fever or during exercise.
It may also be caused by certain drugs, such as adrenaline, atropine, caffeine, alcohol and subutamol,
all of which can raise the heart rate.
It's also found as a compensatory mechanism in anemia and hypovolemia,
and may be a symptom of hypothyroidism.
The cardiac axis gives one, an idea of the general wave of the depolarization within the heart.
The normal axis is between minus 30 and positive 90 degrees.
And left axis is between minus 30 and minus 90.
Right axis deviation is when it's between positive 90 and positive 180 degrees.
In left axis deviation, you get a positive R-wave in lead one,
and a negative R-wave in lead A-V-F, as well as a negative R-wave in lead two.
And some causes of this is wolf pockets and white syndrome,
--- page 3 ---
inferior myocardial infarction and left ventricular hypertrophy.
In right axis deviation, the R-wave is negative in lead one
and positive in lead A-V-F.
And this can be found in right ventricular hypertrophy.
Other subtypes of WPW syndrome,
this can be due to atrial fibrillation, can be a sign of hyperkalemia,
or it can occur in sign of atrial block.
The P-waves are inverted if there's dextrocardia,
if there are atrial ectopics where the impulse is arising from low down in the atrium,
and the P-wave may be negative in junctional rhythms of ventricular ectopics
when they is retrograde depolarization of the atria.
Very tall P-waves is known as P-pominale,
where the P-waves are more than 2.5 millimeters in height,
and it is a sign of right atrial enlargement.
And this can be seen in pulmonary hypertension,
pulmonary stenosis, and tricuspid stenosis.
And a very wide P-wave, more than 120 milliseconds wide,
is known as P-mitrale, and occurs as a sign of left atrial enlargement.
The P-waves are often bifut in appearance, they've got two peaks,
and it's usually due to mitral valve disease,
therefore giving it the name P-mitrale.
The PR interval is measured from the start of the P-wave to the start of the R-wave,
and it is a sign of the conduction delay that occurs in the AV node.
Basically, it's the total time of depolarization of the atria,
until depolarization of the ventricles,
or just before depolarization of the ventricles.
And it should be between 120 to 200 milliseconds long,
and it should be consistent in length from beat to beat.
And Q-waves, they are pathological if they are more than 25% of the height
of the following R-wave, or if they are more than one small block in width.
Pathological Q-waves are usually a sign of previous myocardial infarction,
but it can also be seen in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy
and in bundle branch blocks.
Now looking at the QRS complex, the QRS complex should be less than 120 milliseconds in width,
and the R-wave should increase in height from V1 to V6
when you look at the pre-chordial leads,
and we call this progression of the R-wave.
And that is because the left ventricle has the most mass in the heart,
so it has the most number of myocytes,
and therefore will give you the biggest R-wave.
--- page 4 ---
So V5 and V6 are on the lateral surface of the heart.
They are looking predominantly at the left ventricle,
and therefore they have the tallest R-waves.
V1 and V2 are looking at the anterior wall in the septum,
and therefore they have a smaller R-wave,
because the small R-wave is due to depolarization of the septum,
and then the deeper S-wave is when you get depolarization of the ventricular free wall,
which gives you a much larger amplitude wave.
In left ventricular hypertrophy,
you will get a much taller R-wave in V5 and V6,
because V5 and V6 are looking at the left ventricular free wall,
and you'll get a deeper S-wave in V1 and V2.
To satisfy criteria of left ventricular hypertrophy,
you need an R-wave of more than 27 millimeters in V5,
or if you add the S-wave in V1 to the R-wave in V5,
and the sum of those amplitudes are more than 35 millimeters,
that's a sign of left ventricular hypertrophy.
In right ventricular hypertrophy,
you get a tall R-wave in V1.
Normally, the R-wave in V1 is much smaller than the S-wave,
but in right ventricular hypertrophy,
you get an R-wave that is taller than the S-wave,
and we call that a dominant R-wave.
You also get persistence of the S-wave in V5 and V6.
This ECG is an example of left ventricular hypertrophy,
and you can see that the S-wave in V1,
when added to the R-wave in V5,
will be more than 35 millimeters in height.
This is an example of right ventricular hypertrophy.
You can see that there's a dominant R-wave in V1,
and there's a large assistant S-wave in V5 and V6.
So ventricular hypertrophy will give you
abnormally tall QRS complexes.
Bundle branch blocks give you abnormally wide QRS complexes,
and that's because whatever happens on the ECG,
when it takes long to occur,
the waves become wider.
Now, when the impulses are traveling through the normal conduction system,
conduction is great quick, and therefore, the waves become narrower,
so you get a QRS that is less than 120 milliseconds in width.
--- page 5 ---
However, when there's a left bundle branch block,
you get the impulses is unable to travel through that bundle,
and therefore, only one ventricle is depolarized,
and then the impulse spreads from myocyte to myocyte through the myocardium
to the other ventricle.
This takes much longer, and therefore, you get a wider QRS complex.
So in right bundle branch block,
first, you get activation or depolarization of the left ventricle,
and then slow depolarization of the right ventricle.
That gives you an M-pattern in V1 and a W-pattern in V6,
and the QRS complex is more than 120 milliseconds in width.
In the left bundle branch block, it's the opposite,
and you get a W-pattern in V1 and an M-pattern in V6.
The ST segment is measured
by a small block after the J-point.
The J-point is when the QRS complex becomes, meets the isoelectric line,
and it is significant if it is more than one millimeter elevated.
Causes of ST segment elevation include
ST elevation, myocardial infarction, which is the commonest cause.
It also be caused by pericoditis and left ventricular aneurysm.
It can occur in Prince metal angina,
left bundle branch block, and more Rayleigh in Brigada syndrome.
In pericoditis, the ST segment elevation is saddle-shaped,
which is concave.
There are no Q waves, and there are no reciprocal changes.
Now, reciprocal changes imply that if you have ST elevation in one area of the heart,
in another area of the heart, you will get reciprocal ST depression.
That occurs in ST elevation, myocardial infarction,
but not in pericoditis.
In pericoditis, you have widespread ST elevation,
which is saddle-shaped over most of the leads.
The other finding in pericoditis is that you get PR segment depression
in standard lead two, and you get PR segment elevation in AVR,
and that's a pathinemonic for pericoditis.
In myocardial ischemia.
The ST elevation has a convex or camel hump type of appearance.
As you get myocardial necrosis, you will find that there's development of Q waves,
and you have reciprocal changes such as on this ECG.
You will see that there's ST elevation from V1 to V5,
and there's ST segment depression in two, three, and AVR in the reciprocal area.
--- page 6 ---
You also have ST elevation in contiguous leads,
so that means that there's a single territory that's involved.
In this case, it's the antarolateral area.
You can see from V1 to V5, as well as one in AVL.
Those are just the anterior and the lateral leads,
and then the inferior leads there's reciprocal ST depression.
ST depression is significant if it's more than half a millimeter in depth,
and it's usually caused by myocardial ischemia or myocardial strain.
It can also occur with the use of the joxone,
where you have a downsloping ST depression and T wave inversion,
known as a reverse tick, and it can occur in hypokalemia as well.
The U waves may be seen in many normal ECGs, especially in younger patients.
It occurs just after the T wave, and it becomes more prominent in hypokalemia.
Now we're going to go through some of the key findings on the ECG
during myocardial infarction.
The first sign is that you get tall or hyper acute T waves.
After that, the ST segments start to go up and come elevated.
As you get myocardial in the process, you get the development of Q waves.
Over time, the ST segments will return to normal,
and the T waves will become inverted, but the Q waves will persist
as a sign of previous myocardial infarct.
These patients may also present with a new bundle branch block in a stingy.
This is just a diagrammatic representation of all these phases.
You can see here this is a normal ECG with a QRS complex
and an isoelectric ST segment.
In early MI, the T wave becomes peaked.
Then gradually, you get ST elevation.
And then as you get to necrosis, there's loss of the R wave
and formation of Q waves, and eventually the T waves become inverted
and the STs will come back to normal.
We can use the ECG to determine which area of the myocardium is being infected.
The anterior leads are V1 to V4.
The lateral leads are 1 AVL, V5 and V6.
And the combination of the two territories will give you an antralateral infarct.
The antralceptal infarct is limited to V1 to V3.
The inferior infarct is 2, 3, and AVF.
And if you have an infrolateral infarct, it often involves V5 and V6 as well.
To determine if there's a right ventricular infarct,
it usually occurs in the setting of an inferior infarction.
And then we transpose the V4 lead from the left side onto the right chest,
--- page 7 ---
and we repeat the ECG and you may see ST elevation.
And we call that V4R.
So if there's ST elevation in V4R, that's a sign of a right ventricular infarct.
A posterior myocardium infarct also usually occurs
in the setting of an inferior infarct.
And the signs of a posterior infarct are 12 R waves in V1 with the ST depression.
You can also use the pre-chordia leads and place them at the back of the chest.
So instead of V4 to V6, you can put them around the back of the chest
and we call those V7, 8, and 9.
And if you have ST elevation in those leads, that's a sign of posterior infarct.
This patient you can see has ST elevation from V3 to V6, as well as 1 in AVL.
And this is an example of an antralateral myocardial infarction.
And here you can see that there's ST elevation in 2, 3 AVF, as well as V5 and V6.
And this is an infarralateral myocardial infarction.
On the ECG, we can also see signs of certain electrolyte abnormalities.
And this is because the impulse is generated in the heart due to the movement of certain ions across a membrane,
which generates the action potential.
With hypokalemia, you get a flattened T-wave.
You can get a more prominent U-wave.
You also have ST depression and T-wave inversion.
You can see that here there's downstoping ST depression and T-wave inversion,
similar to the reverse tick pattern you see in the drugs and use.
In hypokalemia, initially you will get a tall peak T-wave.
You also have flattening of the P-wave, a prolongation of the PR interval.
And as the potassium level rises, the purest complex has become smaller and broader.
And eventually this can precipitate ventricular fibrillation, which is why hypokalemia is regarded as a medical emergency.
In hypothermia, patients will often have a bradycardia.
You can have an irregular baseline, and this may be due to the patient shivering.
And you get a wave at the tail end of the purest complex called a J-wave or an Osborne-wave.
Now we're going to go through some of the disorders of conduction.
We spoke about the PR interval, and it being a marker of the time of depolarization of the atrium as well as the conduction delay within the AV node.
So in first degree AV block, you have a long but constant PR interval.
The PR interval must be more than 200 milliseconds or five small blocks.
Each P-wave is followed by a QRS complex, so there's always conduction from the atrium to the ventricles.
And causes of first degree AV block may be ischemia, may be due to hypokalemia, chromatic heart disease.
Another important cause is an aortic root abscess when the abscess and the aortic root presses against the AV node and causes slowing of conduction within the AV node.
And first degree AV block may also be caused by certain rate limiting drugs such as the drugs and beta blockers and calcium channel blockers.
In second degree AV block, there are two types.
You get Mobitz type 1 and Mobitz type 2.
In both types of second degree AV block, you have a P-wave, which with no following QRS complex.
--- page 8 ---
That's because the atrium depolarized, but the conduction is stopped in the AV node and it is not transmitted to the ventricles.
In Mobitz type 1, you have progressive prolongation of the PR intervals.
So from beat to beat, you can see the PR interval lengthening and then there's a P-wave without a following QRS complex.
So the P-wave, the PR interval lengthens, then the P-wave fails to be conduct and then it returns to normal.
In the Mobitz type 2, here you get a constant PR interval.
Most of the P-waves are followed by QRS complexes.
However, you will get suddenly a dropped beat where it is a P-wave, but no following QRS complex.
And the way to differentiate Mobitz type 1 and type 2 is that you look at the PR intervals.
There's no change in the PR interval with the Mobitz type 2.
However, with Mobitz type 1, you can see that the PR interval progressively lengthens.
Mobitz type 2, secondary hard block requires tastemaker insertion because of the higher risk of progression to complete hard block.
In third degree AV block, the P-waves have no relationship to the QRS complexes.
So there's no conduction through the AV node.
The ATRI are being depolarized at a rate set by the sino-atrial node.
And you can see that they are P-waves and the PP intervals are constant.
The ventricles are generating their own impulse, which is known as a ventricular escape.
It gives you a broad QRS complex.
And that is at a different rate from the ATRI rate.
And so you get complete AV dissociation.
And these patients will require pacemaker insertion.
Okay, now we're going to go through some of the tacky arrhythmias.
So to approach a tacky arrhythmias first, you've got to identify the rhythm strip,
the rhythm strip, which is usually lead to.
We have to determine whether the rhythm is regular or irregular, whether it's a bradycardia or a tackycardia,
whether it's narrow complex or broad complex.
Narrow complexes are usually due to or always due to a supraventricular tackycardia.
A broad complex, broad QRS complex can be due to ventricular tackycardia in about 80% of cases.
But in about 20% of cases, it may be due to a supraventricular tackycardia with a bundle branch block.
Supraventricular tackycardia refers to any heart rate above 100.
That originates above the level of the ventricles.
And it's a broad term, which encompasses many arrhythmias, including sinus tackycardia,
atrial fibrillation, or atrial flutter, atrial tackycardia, and avinodal reentry tackycardia,
as well as atrial ventricular reentry tackycardia.
Atrial fibrillation is one of the commonest arrhythmias, and it's due to a rapid chaotic depolarization
occurring throughout the atrial and arising from multiple foci within the atrial.
And you can see in this diagram, in normal sinus rhythm, the impulse is generated by the sino atrial node
in the roof of the right atrium, and that's transmitted down to the avinode.
And from the avinode, you get depolarization of the ventricles.
In atrial fibrillation, there are multiple different foci that are generating the impulse.
It's all bombarding the avinode, and a proportion of these are transmitted to the ventricles
--- page 9 ---
in an irregular fashion.
And that's why you are getting an absence of p-waves, because there's no organized contraction
of depolarization of the atrial, the atrial being chaotically depolarized from multiple areas.
Therefore, you get absentee wave with a fibrillating baseline and irregular QRS complex.
Atrial flutter is due to a reentry circuit around the right atrium.
The atrial rate is about 250 to 350 per minute.
However, not all these atrial flutter waves are conducted through the avinode.
So the avinode is not able to conduct such a high impulse, and usually you get either two to one, three to one
or four to one transmission of the impulse through the avinode.
You get a typical sawtooth flutter waves on the baseline, and there is regular QRS complexes.
You can also have irregular conduction through the avinode as well.
So although in this ECG, you get regular QRS complexes, you may have irregular complexes
with atrial flutter as well.
In atrial tachycardia, the heart rate is often more than 150 per minute.
The p-waves are present, but they're not always easily visible, and they may be abnormally shaped
due to an ectopic focus.
So here you can see that the p-waves are just off to the QRS complexes and they're sort of sharp
and not the usual pattern.
In ventricular arrhythmias, you get a broad QRS complex.
Ventricular tachycardia is when you have a broad ventricular complex that's more than,
and you're getting a rate of more than 120 per minute.
In an accelerated ventricular rhythm, it's between 40 and 120, and an idiom ventricular rhythm,
it's 30 to 40.
So ventricular tachycardia is defined as three or more successive ventricular beats,
at a rate of more than 120 beats per minute.
And it arises either from a reentry circuit or due to a specific ventricular focus,
such as an area of scarring from a previous myocardial infar.
These episodes may be self-terminating or sustained, and the risk with ventricular tachycardia
is that they may rapidly degenerate and cause ventricular fibrillation.
In ventricular tachycardia, you may have hemodynamic compromise with hypotension,
and in this case, its medical emergency and the patient requires urgent DC or electrical cardioversion.
The example in this case is a monomorphic ventricular tachycardia.
So you can see that all these QRS complexes look the same,
those arising from a specific focus.
You also get a polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, where you have differing QRS complexes.
The commonest form of VT, of polymorphic VT, is tensile support,
and this may be precipitated by an electrolyte abnormalities, such as hypo-magnesiumia,
which can also be caused by conditions in which is QT interval prolongation,
such as the use of certain anti-arithmic drugs and hereditary long QT syndromes.
And TOSAD support is often associated with ventricular fibrillation
--- page 10 ---
and requires urgent attention, usually by giving IV magnesium and electrical cardioversion.
Ventricular fibrillation is a rapidly fatal arrhythmia, most commonly due to myocardial infarction,
but can occur as a result of electrolyte abnormalities, and this requires urgent defibrillation.
And acystly is due to an absence of oral electrical activity.
Lastly, we're going to look at short pr intervals.
So the commonest cause of a short pr interval is both pockets and wide syndrome,
and this is because of an accessory pathway known as the bundle of KENT,
which occurs between the atrium and the ventricles.
So the conduction through the accessory pathway is often faster than through the atrium ventricular node.
And because there is a second pathway connecting the atrium and the ventricles,
there's a potential to have a circuit to develop and cause atrium ventricular reentry tachycardia.
So in normal sinus rhythm, the impulse is transmitted from the SA node to the AV node
and then through the bundle of hyst to the right and left bundle branches.
However, when there is an accessory pathway present, some of the impulses go down through the AV node,
but some also go down through the accessory pathway.
And because normally the AV node causes a delay in transmission of the impulses from the atrium to the ventricles,
and there is no delay in the accessory pathway, you get a short pr interval
because there is immediate depolarization of the ventricles after the atrium.
And that's why you get, on the ECG you get a short pr interval and something called the delta wave.
The delta wave is a slurred upstroke in the QRS complex.
And it's slurred because it is slow and because although there is immediate depolarization of the ventricles
and there's no delay like you get through the AV node, the depolarization of the ventricle is slow
because it is not traveling through the normal conduction system
and it's instead traveling through the myocardium itself.
Now, when you have an accessory pathway, you can also get the development of a circuit
where you get conduction down through the AV node, down through the bundle branches into the myocardium,
but then back up through the accessory pathway, which then depolarizes the atrium, which then depolarizes the ventricles,
and you get what is known as a macro re-entricle circuit or an atrium ventricular re-entricle cardiac.
So, just to summarize the approach of tachy arrhythmias, if it is narrow and regular,
then our differentials are sinus tachycardia, atrial flutter, atrial tachycardia, AV nodal re-entricle cardiac,
or atrial ventricular re-entricle cardiac.
If it is narrow and irregular, most commonly it's due to atrial fibrillation, it can also be atrial flutter with a variable block
or atrial tachycardia with a variable block.
If it is wide and regular, in 80% of cases it's ventricular tachycardia,
but in 20% of cases it can be a super ventricular tachycardia with a bundle branch block,
and if it is wide and irregular, it's usually atrial fibrillation with a bundle branch block
or atrial fibrillation with wolf buckets and white syndrome.
Thank you.
