--- page 1 ---
Okay, good day. I'm Dr. Naidu from the Department of Cardiology. I will be doing the lecture
on the evaluation of valvular heart disease.
Okay, we're going to start by discussing rheumatic fever. By definition, rheumatic fever is a systemic
disease of childhood. It's often recurrent that follows group A, beta-homolytic streptococcal
infection. It is a diffuse inflammatory disease of connective tissue and it primarily involves
the heart, the blood vessels, the joints, the subcutaneous tissue, and the central nervous system.
In terms of the pathogenesis, it's a delayed immune response to infection with group A,
beta-homolytic streptococcal. You usually have a latent period which usually lasts about one
to three weeks. You have an antibody induced immunological damage which occurs to be heart
valves, the joints, the subcutaneous tissue, and basal ganglia of the brain.
To diagnose rheumatic fever, we use the modified Jones criteria and that is divided into major
and minor criteria. The major criteria includes a carditis and that this is a pan carditis,
so it affects the pericardium, the myocardium, and the endocardium. You also have a polyarthritis.
This is typically described as a flitting arthritis, so it normally affects one joint and then progresses
to involve adjacent joints. There's also the presence of subcutaneous nodules, erythema
margenatum, and sydnam's career. The minor criteria include the presence of a fever,
arthralgia, elevated ESR and C-reactive protein, the presence of a leukocytosis,
and a prolonged PR interval on your ECG. A prolonged PR interval on the ECG may also indicate
a possible root abscess. We also look for supporting evidence of streptococcal infection,
and this includes increased teetres of antistreptococcal antibodies,
your ASOT and your anti-DNA's. We look for the presence of a positive throat culture for group
A streptococcal and the presence of recent scarlet fever. In terms of treatment,
we look at primary prevention, and this is the eradication of streptococcal. We also look at
using anti-inflammatory treatment, and this includes aspirin and steroids, supportive management,
and we manage complications that occur, and secondary prevention, which is prevention of recurrent
attacks, which is also very important. In terms of primary prevention of rheumatic fever,
the treatment of choice is benzetine penicillin, which is intramuscular, or pen vk, which is 500
milligrams BD oral, for 10 days. For individuals allergic to penicillin, the options include erythromycin
or erythromycin, and this is used for between 5 and 10 days.
In terms of anti-inflammatory agents, the agents we use for the arthritis include aspirin,
--- page 2 ---
which is for the rapid resolution of fever and the atrologia, but important to remember that
the incidence of rheumatic heart disease is not decreased. For the carditis, we can also use
prednisone, 2 to 2.5 milligrams per kg BD for two weeks, and to taper over two weeks,
while introducing aspirin. The prednisone reduces the inflammatory response,
which is your fever and your acute-phase reactance, but there's little objective
evidence for rapid resolution of your cardiac compromise, and it should be reserved for acute
severe carditis. Supportive management is also important, and this includes bedrest,
treatment of your heart failure. For the treatment of Korea, we use diasepam or haloperidol,
and it's also important to rest the joints and to consider supportive splinting.
Secondly, prevention of rheumatic fever, and this is to prevent recurrent attacks. The agents we use
are benzodine penicillin or pen VK again. In terms of benzodine penicillin, it's 1.2 million units
every four weeks intramuscular, or pen VK, which is 250 milligrams twice a day, which is oral.
Again, for patients allergic to penicillin, we use erythromycin, which is 250 milligrams twice a day,
oral. And important to also note that in high-risk situations, administration every three weeks
is justified and recommended. In terms of the duration of secondary prophylaxis,
we look at different categories. If patients have had dramatic fever,
with carditis, and residual heart disease, we look at using the prophylaxis for at least 10 years
since the last residual episode, and at least until the age of 40, and sometimes we even use
lifelong prophylaxis. If patients have had dramatic fever, with carditis, but no residual heart
disease, we look at using prophylaxis for 10 years, or until the age of 21, whichever is longer.
For patients with rheumatic fever, without carditis, we look at 5 years, or until age 21,
whichever is longer. But it's also important to realize that in patients with very severe
valve disease or post-surgery, we use lifelong prophylaxis. In terms of evaluation of valvular
heart disease, the predominant symptoms that patients with valve disease present with are
dysneal, PND, adopnea. They may also complain of palpitations, syncope, or presynchope. Other
complaints include a cough, hemoptasis, or chest pain. In terms of dysneal,
dysneal is the uncomfortable awareness of breathing, and it's due to pulmonary congestion, due to
heart failure, and this is due to interstitial and alveolar edema, which stimulates the
J receptors in the lung, and this stimulates respiration. Other signs include cyanosis,
and this may be central or peripheral. Central is due to reduced oxygenation,
--- page 3 ---
due to right-to-left shunting, or impaired pulmonary function, and in late onset patients who develop
isometric syndrome, these patients may present with cyanosis. They may also be peripheral cyanosis,
and this may be due to cutaneous vasoconstriction, or reduced cardiac output. Patients may also
complain of palpitations, and this is the unpleasant awareness of a forceful or rapidly
beating heart, and the common causes of palpitations include arrhythmias, heartblock, ectopic beats,
high output states, and a sudden onset of bradycardias. Adema is another common sign that patients
present with, and the most common cause of the bilateral edema would be heart failure,
but important to recognize that there are other causes of bilateral lower limb swelling,
and this includes renal causes and hepatic causes. In terms of the physical examination,
it's important to do a good general exam and to look for features of anemia, clubbing,
jaundice, the presence of splinter hemorrhages, and any peripheral features of valvular heart
disease, and we're going to go through these features with the individual lesions that we are
going to discuss. Specific lesions in terms of the atiology can be congenital or acquired.
In our setting, the most common cause of valve disease that we see is rheumatic heart disease.
The other causes include older age with degeneration or calcification,
infective endocarditis, rarer causes include connected tissue disease,
collagen vascular disease, and drugs. In terms of the management of our valve lesions,
we look at medical management and surgical management. The goals of medical management
is to improve your hemodynamics, to delay progression of the valve disease, and to prevent
infective endocarditis. Surgical intervention or percutaneous intervention is required to
improve survival and your quality of life. So we're going to begin by discussing mitral stenosis,
and like mentioned earlier, the predominant cause that we see is due to rheumatic fever,
and this is due to fusion of your commissures, clasps, and quads. Rarer causes of mitral stenosis
include congenital, carcinoid syndrome, SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, and amyloid.
In terms of history, patients normally complain of dyspnea, and is normally exertional dyspnea
due to reduced pulmonary compliance. Patients may also complain of palpitations, and a common
cause of the palpitations is when the patients develop atrial fibrillation. Other symptoms
include hemodptosis and hoarseness of the voice. In terms of the physical examination,
we look for the presence of mitral facies. The path is normally small volume. It may be
irregularly irregular if the patients have developed atrial fibrillation. The apex
--- page 4 ---
beat is normally tapping and non-displaced. They may be a diastolic thrill present at the apex
due to the mitral stenosis, and we also look for features of palmy hypertension. This will be a
palpable P2, a loud P2, which is found in the second left intercostal space, and we look for
the presence of a paracetone or heave. The paracetone or heave may indicate left atrial or
right ventricular enlargement. On oscrotation, we look for the presence of a loud first heart
sound. If the valve is heavily calcified, the first heart sound may be soft. If this features a
palmy hypertension, the second heart sound will be loud. We also look for the presence of an
opening snap after the second heart sound, and this implies that the valve is pliable. The
two features of a pliable mitral valve would include a loud S1 and the presence of an opening
snap. The opening snap is present due to sudden tensing of the valve leaflets after completing
their opening excursion. The diastolic murmur is normally a low-pitched rumbling murmur at the apex.
It normally starts after the opening snap, and important to remember that the length is proportional
to severity. So the longer the murmur, the more severe the mitral stenosis is. And in
severe mitral stenosis, the murmur may even be hollow diastolic. Other murmurs may also be present.
There may be a pan-sustolic murmur at the left sternal border, and this is due to functional
tricuspid regurgitation. In terms of the pathophysiology, the normal mitral valve area is
between 4 to 6 centimeters squared. With mild stenosis, which is between 2 to 4 centimeters,
a small pressure gradient is required to propel blood towards the left ventricle.
So with moderate mitral valve disease where you have a valve area between 1 to 2 centimeters
squared, or with severe mitral valve stenosis where the valve area is less than 1 centimeters squared,
there's an increase in your left atrial pressure, and you require at least 25 millimeters to
maintain a cardiac output address. With an increase in left atrial pressure, there's also an increase
with time of your pulmonary venous pressure, and this results also an increased pulmonary
capillary pressure. This further will result in your RV dilatation and your functional tricuspid
regurgitation that patients present with. In terms of the ECG, we look for features of
left atrial enlargement with a P-wave in lead 2 of greater than 0.12 seconds.
We look for features of RVH, which may be a dominant R-wave in lead V1. Any features of right
axis deviation, and we look for the absence of P-waves with an irregular irregular rhythm,
which may suggest atrial fibrillation on the ECG. The chest x-ray also may indicate features
of mitral stenosis. We look for features of left atrial RV or RA enlargement,
--- page 5 ---
splaying of the left main bronchus, features of interstitial edema, which include curly A and
curly B lines, any classification of the mitral valve or features of palmi edema,
and in late stage, they may be features of palmihemous edirosis on the chest x-ray,
and this is very similar to a mulerie pattern on the chest x-ray. It's one of the differentials
for a mulerie pattern on the chest x-ray, and with other features on the chest x-ray of MS,
you need to consider a diagnosis of mitral stenosis. In terms of the echo cardiography,
on 2D echo, we can appreciate features of thickened calcified stenotic valves. We look for fusion of
the mitral valve leaflets and poor leaflet separation in diastole. We may also appreciate
an increased left atrial size on the echo. We look for presence of left atrial thrombus,
and we also look at the sub-valvular apparatus for any thickening.
We can also quantify the severity of mitral stenosis. On the echo, and like mentioned earlier,
a valve area of less than 1.5 is considered severe MS. We can estimate the palmi pressures
on the echo, and we can also assess to see if there's any mitral regurgitation or
concomitant valve lesions on the echo. In terms of management of the mitral stenosis,
as mentioned earlier, we look at medical, surgical, and percutaneous treatment.
In terms of medical treatment, we need to treat any infection and anemia promptly and aggressively.
We use IV directics for palmi congestion. If the patients are in atrial
fibrillation, we need to control the ventricular rate. It's very important that these patients
aren't tachycardic because they rely on the diastolic filling time to maintain a cardiac
output. The drugs we use to control the heart rate would include beta blockers provided that they
do not have severe palmi hypertension. We also need to look to see if there's any indications
to anticoagulate these patients. The main indications for anticoagulation in mitral stenosis would
include atrial fibrillation, like we mentioned, the presence of a left atrial clot, or if there's
any evidence of previous embolic phenomena related to the mitral stenosis, these patients will need to
be anticoagulated. We also look at surgical intervention. So if the patients are symptomatic
and the mitral valve area, as assessed by echo cardiography, is less than 1.5 centimeters squared,
these patients will require further intervention. We look at either doing something called a
vavular plastic or a BMV. This is done in patients that have pliable valves with no significant
left atrial clot and no significant mitral regurgitation. This is done percutaneously. If this is not an
option, then these patients will require surgical mitral valve replacement, and this is done in
--- page 6 ---
theater. Okay, the next lesion we're going to discuss is mitral regurgitation.
And in terms of the etiology, it can be due to any abnormality of any component of the mitral
valve apparatus. This includes the leaflets, the cords, the left ventricle itself, or the
annulus. But again in our center, the main cause would be rheumatic heart disease. Other causes
include infective endocarditis, collagen vascular disease, ischemic heart disease,
and mitral valve prolapse. In terms of the pathology, it can affect the leaflets, leaflets,
where you get shortening, thickening, deformity, retraction. It may also be due to perforation of
the leaflets or traumatic destruction. In terms of the annulus, it could be due to
dilatation of the annulus or calcification. The cordate can be lengthened or ruptured,
resulting in mitral regurgitation. And the papillary muscle due to ischemic heart disease
could be abnormal, or they could be papillary muscle rupture. And all of those predisposes
to affecting a mitral valve apparatus, and results in mitral regurgitation.
In terms of mitral regurgitation pathophysiology, your effective forward output is reduced,
despite an increased cardiac output. So your left ventricle compensates for the
increase in diastolic volume by eccentric hypertrophy and dilatation.
In terms of the physical examination, there's normally a brisk hyperdynamic apex beat,
which is normally displaced. They may be the presence of a left atrial lift,
and this is a late systolic thrust in the peristonal region. In terms of oscillation,
the S1 is soft. The S2 may be loud if there's palmi hypertension present. In terms of
additional sounds, they may be the presence of a third heart sound, and this is due to
increased flow across the mitral valve. In terms of the mama, it's normally a pan-cystolic mama,
which is blowing and high pitched in origin. It's normally present at the apex, and it radiates
towards the axilla, and it's normally accentuates its increased on expiration.
In terms of the ECG, we may appreciate features of left atrial enlargement,
left ventricular hypertrophy. 15% may present with features of RVH. Again, we look for abnormal
heart rhythms, and the common one that we look for is atrial probation. On the chest x-ray,
we look for features of left ventricular enlargement, early enlargement with a lifted left main bronchus,
and then we look for any features of calcification on the mitral valve.
Again, in terms of management, we look at medical management first. We look at using
diuretics if there's any features of palmi congestion. In patients with mitral regurgitation,
--- page 7 ---
we also use vasodilators, and we do that to try to improve forward cardiac output. In terms of
a surgical intervention for these patients, if patients have documented severe mitral
regurgitation on echo, and these patients are symptomatic, those patients will be presented
for mitral valve replacement. If the patients are asymptomatic, we look at features on the
echo to suggest chamber dilatation. We look for an end systolic diameter of more than 40 millimeters,
or an EF of less than 60 percent, provided the ejection fraction is more than 30 percent.
We can't operate on these patients if the LV function is severely impaired and less than 30 percent.
We also look for other features to suggest that these patients may benefit from surgical intervention,
and this includes the presence of atrial fibrillation or significant palmi hypertension.
But the main one that we look for in asymptomatic patients is the presence of chamber dilatation,
and an end systolic diameter of more than 40 millimeters. Those patients would require
surgical mitral valve replacement. The next lesion we're going to discuss is aortic stenosis,
and it can be congenital where patients may present with a bicuspid, tricuspid, or unicuspid
valves. By an hour setting, the most common cause is acquired causes, and the two most common
would be degenerative calcified valves in our elderly population, and two percent of people
over 65 will present with calcified aortic valves. And the other common cause, this will be in a
younger patient population, would be rheumatic heart disease, where patients have adhesion and
fusion of the commissures of the valve. So with degeneration, the calcium deposition is along
the flexural lines at the base of the cusp, and arteriosclerosis predisposes to calcification.
In terms of the pathophysiology, you have a very narrow aortic valve orifice,
and your left ventricle output is only maintained by concentric left ventricular hypertrophy.
The normal aortic valve area is between three to four centimeters squared,
and severe aortic stenosis would be a valve area of less than one centimeter squared.
There's also echocardiography criteria to assess for severity of aortic stenosis,
and we look at a peak gradient of more than 64 millimeters of mercury, or a mean gradient of
40 millimeters across the aortic valve, which suggests that it is severe aortic stenosis.
The clinical symptoms, the most important symptoms would include angina, syncope,
and dyspnea. Patients may also complain of a grain art or dizzy spells. They may also complain
of GIT bleeding. They may be a concomitant effective endocarditis, and it's important to
remember that once patients develop symptoms, they indicate a very poor prognosis.
--- page 8 ---
If patients have symptoms of heart failure, your lifespan is between is around two years.
If patients have syncope three years, and if patients have angina, it's five years.
So once patients are symptomatic, they definitely require some intervention,
because their life expectancy is reduced. In terms of the physical examination,
in terms of the pulse, we classically describe the pulse as a pelvis-tardis pulse.
This is a slow rising pulse. The apex beat, we describe it as a heaving, sustained,
and is normally a non-displaced apex beat. They may be the presence of a systolic
throw at the second intercostal space. On ascaltation, the S1 may be normal, the S2 may be single.
In terms of additional sounds, we look for the presence of an S4, and the S4 is due to the
atrium, which is contracting against a stiff and ventricle, and it produces a diastolic sound,
which is a fat heart sound. In terms of the murmur, it's normally an ejection systolic murmur,
present at the aortic area, which can be widely radiating, and it also radiates
to the carotid arteries as well. The later the murmur peaks insistally, the more severe the
aortic stenosis, also the length of the murmur is proportional to severity. The longer the murmur,
the more severe the aortic stenosis. In terms of the ECG, we may appreciate features of left
ventricular hypertrophy with a strain pattern. There may be pseudo-infection patterns, presence
of left atrial enlargement, and atrial fibrillation is normally a late feature in aortic stenosis.
In terms of the chest x-ray, the heart size is normally is normal or slightly increased.
They may be post-donatic dilatation of the aorta. The echo, as mentioned, we use it to
assess the pressure gradients across the valve, and we can also do that in angiography. But the
one we mainly use is our echo parameters to assess the severity of aortic stenosis,
and as mentioned, a valve area of less than one with a peak gradient of more than 64,
or a mean gradient of more than 40 millimeters of mercury across the valve signifies severe aortic
stenosis. In terms of the management, in terms of asymptomatic patients, these patients need
to report symptoms promptly, because as mentioned earlier, once patients develop symptoms,
life expectancy is dramatically reduced. These patients also need to avoid vigorous exercise,
and we normally assess them every six months to a year to assess the gradients and look at
their symptoms and their echo parameters. In terms of symptomatic patients, medical therapy is of
limited value, and the aortic valve replacement is the treatment of choice.
There is another intervention where you could look at a transcutaneous aortic valve replacement
--- page 9 ---
called a TAVA for these patients as well. Unfortunately, we don't have that in the state
sector at the moment, but it is another treatment option that is available in the private sector.
So in terms of our management, once the patients are symptomatic, we look at an aortic valve replacement.
Once we've defined it as severe, and these patients are symptomatic, and the treatment of choice
that we have is surgical aortic valve replacement. The last lesion we're going to discuss is aortic
regurgitation. Again, we can break down aortic regurgitation as pathology affecting the valve
itself or the aortic root. And the common causes, again, would include dramatic heart disease,
calcified aortic stenosis, infective endocarditis, can be present in your younger patients with bicuspid
aortic valves, connected tissue disease, SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, and it can also be present
in ankylosis, spondylosis as well. So in terms of the aortic root disease, it's due to dilatation
of the ascending aorta, and the common causes would include age-related degeneration,
cystic medial necrosis, presence of an aortic dissection,
syphilitic aortitis, and we're also seeing it recently due to retroviral disease as well.
In terms of the pathophysiology in aortic regurgitation, the entire stroke volume is injected into a
high-pressure chamber. You have an increase in your left ventricular endostolic volume, your preload,
your effective forward stroke volume may be normal. But with time, you have volume overload,
you have eccentric hypertrophy, and eventually, your endostolic wall stress increases,
resulting in a reduction in your ejection fraction.
So you have a gradual enlargement of your left ventricle, while the patient is asymptomatic.
You have symptoms of reduced cardiac reserve of myocardial ischemia occur after considerable
cardiomegaly and myocardial dysfunction, and patients may present with exertional
paroxysmal, nocturnal dyspnea, autofnia, or angina-like symptoms.
In terms of the signs, classic signs include a widened pulse pressure,
normally more than 40 millimeters of mercury, the presence of a collapsing pulse,
a corrugans, which is a widely visible carotid pulse, the presence of
pistol shot or duroses femurals. In terms of the apex speed, it's normally a hyperdynamic
apex speed, which is displaced, hyperdynamic, just like mitral regurgitation, because it is
a volume overloaded state. In terms of the mama's presence, it's an early diastolic mama, the
left sternoborder, and again, the length is proportional to severity.
There may be an additional mama present, which is a mid-diastolic rumble at the apex,
--- page 10 ---
and this is due to rapid flow across the mitral valve, and it's present in severe aortic regurgitation,
and we call that an austenflint mama. In terms of the ECG, we look for presence of left ventricular
pertrophy or strain pattern. There may also be left-axis deviation. The chest x-ray may demonstrate
an increased carotid thoracic ratio with cardiomegaly, and in terms of the echo, we assess the aortic
valve and the root, and we look for the severity of the aortic regurgitation on echo.
In terms of the treatment, again, in terms of medical treatment, with mild to moderate
disease with a normal size heart, these patients require no specific treatment.
If the patients have asymptomatic, but they have severe aortic regurgitation with normal
LV function, we look at using vasodilators to improve your forward output, and this will include
drugs like your aneloprol. We also follow them every six months. So surgical treatment, when
is surgical treatment required, if the patients are symptomatic and we've demonstrated severe
aortic regurgitation on our echo, these patients will require aortic valve replacement.
If patients are asymptomatic, then we look at certain echo parameters to aid us in deciding
whether these patients require surgical intervention. So in asymptomatic patients,
we've demonstrated severe aortic regurgitation on the echo, but these patients have no symptoms.
We look at an end systolic, again, chamber dilatation. We look at an end systolic
diameter of more than 40 millimeters, an end diastolic diameter of more than 70 millimeters,
or if the ejection fraction is less than 50%. And it's important that we recognize these
features, even in asymptomatic patients, because we need to operate before there's irreversible
LV changes that may occur. Okay, that's the end of the lecture. So we've tried to cover
the specific, the main common lesions that we see, which is mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation,
aortic stenosis, and aortic regurgitation. And it's also very important to recognize
the features of rheumatic fever and to prevent recurrent episodes of rheumatic fever without
prophylaxis, because that can just result in ongoing cardiac valve lesions.
Thank you so much. That's the end of the lecture.
It's clear that it's fine.
