--- page 1 ---
I will be discussing the definition, the diagnosis, the management indications for surgery as well
as prophylaxis. Infective endocarditis involves infection of endocardial surface, typically with
vegetations on the endocardium. There may be physical presence of microorganisms in the lesion
and the heart valves are most commonly affected. Patients may also develop a central defect
on the mural endocardium. It's virtually always paper if untreated.
Regarding the classification, there are four categories, different infecting organisms
and they run different courses. This may involve the native valve, protein native valve endocarditis,
prosthetic valve endocarditis, endocarditis that is seen in intravenous drug abuses as well as
nosocomial endocarditis. It may also be classified as either acute or subacute.
In acute infective endocarditis, this results in marked toxicity, progresses over days to several
weeks, and results in valvular destruction as well as metastatic infection. The usual organism
here is staphylococcus aureus and if this is untreated, it is fatal in less than six weeks.
In subacute infective endocarditis, this tends to evolve over weeks to months with modest toxicity.
The usual organism here is streptococcus very dense and this really causes metastatic
fossa. Again, if this is untreated, it will be fatal but it usually takes longer than six weeks
compared to acute infective endocarditis.
Just coming to the epidemiology, the annual incidence is about 15 to 20,000 cases per year.
It's the fourth kneeling cause of life-threatening infectious disease
with a slight predeliction for males with a ratio of 1.7 to 1. In up to 45% of cases, it involves
a mitral valve and the aortic in 36%. This slide highlights the different etiological agents
and as you can see, the streptococcus group makes up the majority of cases up to 80%.
Staphylococcus about 20 to 35% and the gram-negative aerobic bacilli
much less percentage up to about 13% and then of course there are other miscellaneous bacteria
as well as fungi that can cause infective endocarditis and remember there's also the
--- page 2 ---
entity of cultured negative endocarditis and this could be up to 24% of cases.
Now the predisposing factors are any type of structural heart disease.
By and large, rheumatic heart disease makes up the bulk of this up to 76%. Then also seen in
patients with congenital heart disease, other patients with degenerative cardiac lesions
and of course having a prosthetic valve may also pose to be a risk.
Just want to discuss the pathogenesis. So the valve surface is altered to produce a suitable
site for bacterial attachment and colonization. When this happens, platelets and fibrin deposit
in the formation of a sterile vegetation, what we termed the lesions of non-bacterial thrombotic
endocarditis. Bacterial when they reach the site, they colonize the area and the surface is then
covered with platelets and fibrin and this results in further bacterial multiplication
and growth of the actual vegetation. As we said, some of the risk factors, IV drug use,
it's the highest risk factor in patients less than 40 years of age.
The prosthetic heart valves, this type of endocarditis comprises a small but important
segment of infected endocarditis cases. There are more than 100,000 heart valves implanted
annually in the US and infected endocarditis develops in one to four percent of valve recipients
during the first year following valve replacement and in approximately one percent per year thereafter.
No zocomial endocarditis is usually a complication of bactylemia which is introduced by an invasive
procedure or vascular device. With regards to structural heart disease, approximately three
fourths or three quarters of all patients with infected endocarditis have a pre-existing
structural cardiac abnormality and again remember we said congenital heart disease is maybe
present in about 10 to 20 percent of cases. The most commonly disposing congenital heart lesions
are bicuspid aortic valves, patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect,
quarkation of the aorta and tetralogy of fallow.
In degenerative valvular lesions, the risk of infected endocarditis in patients with
--- page 3 ---
mitral valve prolapse and associated regurgitation is estimated to be five to eight times higher than
that in the normal population. Aortive valve disease, stenosis and oral regurgitation is
present in 12 to 30 percent of cases. Other risk factors include a previous history of
infected endocarditis. So recurrent endocarditis occurred in about 4.5 percent of patients in a
large cohort of patients. Other studies have reported rates of recurrence ranging from 2.5 up to 9 percent.
HIV infection, a number of cases of endocarditis have been reported in patients with
HIV and it also has been suggested that this is an independent risk factor for endocarditis
amongst IV drug abusers. They are a number of other less commonly disposing factors which
include pregnancy, aging fistulas, central venous and pulmonary artery catheters,
peritoneal venous shunts for the control of societies as well as ventricular atrial
shunts for the management of hydrocephalus. In addition, patients with ulcerative colitis
or ulcerative lesions of the colon due to carcinoma or inflammatory bowel disease have a
poorly understood pre-deliction to develop endocarditis secondary to streptococcus ovus.
Now just to touch on the pathophysiology, the localization of endocarditis is related to high
pressure areas. The downstream from the sides where blood flows at high velocity through a narrow
orifice. When there's a transient back to theemia and this occurs whenever a mucosal surface is
heavily colonized with bacterias traumatized and if there's preexisting non-bacterial
thrombotic endocarditis, this may result in colonization of the bacteria and the infected
endocarditis. Now to adjust the diagnostic approach to infected endocarditis,
a very careful history should be performed with special attention given to history of prior
cardiac lesions and any historical clues pointing toward a recent source of bactylemia.
It goes without saying but a meticulous clinical examination should be performed looking for
clinical evidence of both small and large emboli with special attention to the fundi conjunctivi
skin as well as the digits. A cardiac examination may reveal signs of newly
--- page 4 ---
gurgitant moments and signs of congestive heart failure. In addition, a neurological
evaluation may detect evidence of focal neurological impairment.
The infectious process on the valve including the local intracardia complications
may result in clinical manifestation both bland or septic embolization to any organ,
constant bactylemia and circulating immune complexes give rise to the clinical manifestations
seen in infected endocarditis. This list highlights all the clinical manifestation
fever in more than 95% of cases. Non-specific symptoms such as weakness, weight loss and
night sweats, there may be an audible normal in more than 85% of patients,
particularly ozzlers nodes, chainway lesions, splinter hemorrhages,
less commonly rot spots are seen, clubbing in 20% of patients, a splenomegaly,
musculoskeletal manifestations. There may be major embolic episodes as well as
resulting neurological deficits. In terms of the laboratory findings,
patients often have a normal chronic normalcytic anemia, a low serum ion as well as a low
ion-binding capacity. Prombocytopenia is seen in up to 15% of patients.
It will be a leukocytosis, elevated ESR and hypergammaglobulinemia.
The urine analysis made of the proteinuria, microscopic hematuria and even red cell cast
in some. The rheumatoid factor is present in about half of these patients. It may be circulating
immune complexes, positive anti-nuclear antibodies, innovative levels of serum globulins as well as
the presence of cryoglobulins and hypo complementemia. Sometimes there may be false
positive serological tests for syphilis as well. But remember the blood culture is the most
important lab test. Positive cultures are seen in up to 97% of cases and importantly,
a minimum of three blood cultures should be obtained over a time period based upon the
severity of the illness. Of course, all patients with suspected infective
endocaditis should have an ECG to determine whether there's evidence of heart block or
--- page 5 ---
conduction delay as well as to just establish a baseline should such a complication develop later.
Other investigations include echocardiography, trans-teracic, echo is a rapid, non-invasive
investigation with a high specificity of 98%. Trans-teracicile echo has higher ultrasonic
frequencies and this improves spatial resolution, again with a high specificity and an even higher
sensitivity. This is from the European Society of Cardiology and discusses the indications
for echocardiography. So when there's a clinical suspicion of endocaditis,
a trans-teracic echo should be performed. If a patient has a prosthetic valve or
a intracardiac device, then better to do a trans esophageal echo. Also in the presence of a poor
quality trans-teracic echo, a TE would then be recommended. If the trans-teracic echo is negative
but you still have a clinical suspicion of infective endocaditis and that clinical
suspicion is high then again a TE is recommended. If your clinical suspicion is low then there is
no need to do a TE and you can stop at that point. Now this is the traditional due criteria for
the diagnosis of infective endocaditis. There are major criteria and this includes a positive
blood culture for infective endocaditis. From two separate blood cultures taken on
with either the positive findings of very dense strip striptococcus bovis,
a hisic group or community acquired staphylococcus aureus or enterococca in the absence of a primary
focus. Also presence of a single positive cloud culture for sea bonneti or antibiotic
titer against phase one more than one in 100. In addition, any persistent positive blood culture
with two cultures had strong more than 12 hours apart. So all of the three majority of four more
separate blood cultures with the first and last specimens drawn at least one hour apart.
If there's evidence of endocadial involvement and this will include findings on echo positive
for infective endocaditis which are an oscillating intracardiac mass on the valve or supporting
structures or in the path of regurgitin jets or on any isrogenic device in the absence of
an alternative anatomic explanation. They may be findings of an abscess or new partial
--- page 6 ---
dehiscence of a prosthetic valve. Even a new valvular regurgitation is considered a positive
criteria. The minor criteria include predisposition at an underlying heart condition or IV drug use,
fever greater than 38 degrees Celsius, any vascular phenomenon or immunological
phenomenon like lomerular nephritis or ozzlers nodes and then on echo any findings consistent
with the endocaditis but not meeting the major criteria discussed above. The micro blood biological
evidence, a positive blood culture but not meeting the major criteria noted or
serological evidence of active infection within organism consistent with infective endocaditis.
So in order to make the diagnosis of infective endocaditis you need
either two major criteria or one major and three minor or five minor criteria for a definite
diagnosis. For possible diagnosis of infected endocaditis requires just one major and one minor
or three minor criteria. Again this is drawn from the European Society of Cardiology
discussing the microbiological diagnosis and as we mentioned three independent blood
culture samples that are incubated with positive cultures. If there's clinical or
echo suggestive of infective endocaditis then recommendation is to start antibiotics as appropriate.
If there's no clinical or echo evidence of infective endocaditis then one has to reassess the patient
and consider an alternative diagnosis. One starting treatment we should also
assess the need for surgery. If there's no need for surgery then of course continued medical
therapy is advised and if we do assess a need for surgery then we need to extend
exercise valve or symbolic material for pathology and bacteriology. If the cultures are negative
at 48 hours and they still have clinical or echo suggestion of infective endocaditis then
one has to lie is with the microbiology team and consider additional infective endocaditis
and the recommendation would be to then treat such patients as culture negative.
Again in the absence of any clinical evidence of infective endocaditis an alternative diagnosis
needs to be considered. This slide discusses both the anatomic and echo definitions.
--- page 7 ---
So at surgery one may note an infected mass which is attached
to an endocardial structure or an implanted intracardiac device.
On an echo this will be noted as an oscillating or non-oscillating intracardiac mass.
Absis may be noted at surgery or necropsy with a perivolvular cavity with necrosis and
perivolvular material. On echo this will be seen as thick and non homogenous perivolvular area with
echo dents or echo loosened appearance. There may also be evidence of pseudoannurism,
perforation, fistulas which is communication between two neighboring cavities
and this is also seen on echo when applying color doppler as a communication between
two neighboring cavities through perforation. Other abnormalities and anatomical abnormalities
that are seen are valvular aneurysms which is an outpouching or bulging of the valvular tissue
and in patients with prosthetic valves there may be dehiscence of the prosthesis that is
identified on echo as what we describe as a rocking motion of the prosthesis.
To discuss some of the poor prognostic signs of infective endocaditis would include
infection with staphylococcus aureus, fungal infections, patients with
previous with history of previous infective endocaditis,
both patients who have cyanotic congenital heart disease, congestive cardiac failure,
embolic phenomenon, a rupture for mycotic aneurysm, as well as lack of response to antibiotic therapy,
patients with prosthetic valve Velocaditis are considered to have a poor prognosis and those
patients with periannular extension of the infection. Of course there's a crucial role of prognostic
assessment, looking at patients characteristics, this will include elderly patients as we discussed
just now the prosthetic valve, diabetic patients who are insulin dependent and patients with multiple
comorbidities. This just reiterates again the microorganisms, the staph aureus, fungi, and
they have included gram negative bacilli as well and then complications of infective
endocaditis which include heart failure, renal failure, stroke, septic shock and periannular
--- page 8 ---
complications. On echo this is sometimes seen as severe left-sided valve regurgitations,
patients with a very low ejection fraction, pulmonary hypertension, patients with large
vegetations and severe prosthetic valve dysfunction.
This is a guideline of antibiotic therapy and
in essence this actually discusses the empirical therapy and as you can see it is the
apenicillin-based antibiotic either ampicillin or amoxicillin with clavilinic acid
in addition to gentamicin. In patients who are penicillin allergic in vancomycin with gentamicin
with subprofloxacin is advocated. Patients who have got prosthetic valves
and if the infective endocaditis is early as defined by less than one year
post-surgery, they mean such in these patients vancomycin with gentamicin and rifampin
at those doses mentioned is recommended. In patients who have prosthetic valves would
late onset infective endocaditis in other words more than a year post-surgery then the
antibiotic regime is the same as that of native valve.
Just to discuss some of the indications of surgical therapy this would include refractory
heart failure which is directly related to valve dysfunction. Physiologically significant
valve dysfunction as demonstrated by ECHO. More than two serious systemic
embolic episodes particularly in the presence of large vegetations. In the presence of persistent
or uncontrolled infection, wild receiving antibiotics would be an indication for surgery.
Local superiority of complications, perevalvular myocardial abscesses as well as patients with
narcotic aneurysms would require surgery. The indications for surgery in patients with
native valve, endocaditis and prosthetic valve endocaditis are essentially the same.
Surgery is warranted for patients with active endocaditis who have one or more of the following
complications as we mentioned earlier, the heart failure, persistent infection, and recurrent
emboline. Relative indications for surgery would include evidence of perevalvular infection
--- page 9 ---
such as intracardiac abscess or fistula formation, a rupture of a sinus of balsalva aneurysm,
fungal endocaditis, endocaditis which is secondary to a highly resistant microorganism
and a relapse after a course of adequate antibiotic therapy particularly in those patients with prosthetic
valves. Another indication would be culture negative endocaditis with fever more than 10
days after starting empiric therapy. Some of the echo features for surgical indication.
If one notes persistent vegetation after a major systemic embolic episode, this would be an
indication for surgery. The size of the vegetation, if it's more than one centimeter in diameter,
then this would warrant surgical treatment. And if there's an increase in vegetation size,
despite four weeks of antibiotics, as well as acute mitral insufficiency, if there's a valve
perforation or rupture and any peri-annular extension of the infection.
The outcome of surgery fortunately in patients with infected endocaditis has been good,
particularly when the surgical treatment is radical with removal of all the infected
and necrotic tissue. In a recent study of 138 patients who underwent bowel surgery in the
presence of active infection, the early mortality due to heart failure or septic multi-organ failure
was 11.5%. Risk factors for early mortality were NYHA-plus-4, pathogenic shock, advanced age,
or pre-operative acute renal failure, and staphylococcal infection.
Now, to discuss some of the neurological complications, patients with heart failure,
uncontrolled infection, they have an absence of a high embolic risk. The scan result in
embolic phenomena with resulting intracranial hemorrhage, coma, as well as stroke.
And if this is the case as a complication, then these patients should be managed conservatively
and treated. In the absence of those complications in surgery, it must be considered.
Now, to just discuss the prophylaxis, the rationale, endocaditis usually follows bacteremia.
Risk of endocaditis is small. There's no proof of efficacy or preventative therapy,
but recommended for patients with predisposing cardiac lesions or undergoing procedures known
--- page 10 ---
to cause bacteremia. Those patients with valvular heart disease, congenital heart disease,
and intra cardiac prosthesis, as well as somebody who previously had endocaditis.
The principle of antibiotic prophylaxis when performing procedures to patients who are at risk,
of endocaditis with predisposing cardiac lesions are maintained. The prophylaxis of
antibiotics is limited to patients at the highest risk, undergoing high risk dental procedures.
Of course, good dental hygiene and regular dental review are more important than prophylaxis in
preventing endocaditis. Of course, aseptic measures during venous catheterization and any
invasive procedure is mandatory. This is again from the European Society of Cardiology
procedures at highest risk of infected endocaditis. Antibotic prophylaxis is not recommended for
respiratory tract procedures, GI procedures, and skin and soft tissue procedures.
The recommended prophylaxis for dental procedures for those at risk, if there's no
allergy to penicillin or empicillin, then either amoxicillin or empicillin, two grams
oral OIVs recommended in adults, and in children 50 milligrams per kg,
at the oral or IV. In the presence of penicillin allergy, then clinder mycin,
for adults 2 grams oral or intravenous, and for children 20 milligrams per kg, oral or intravenous.
Thank you.
