--- page 1 ---
In general, there are a group of acute emergencies in people's diabetes, and these are divided
into the hyperglycemic emergencies, including ketoacidosis and the hyperosmolar hyperglycemic
state, and then hyperglycemic disorders.
The first that will be addressed is diabetic ketoacidosis and the hyperglycemic hyperosmolar
state.
So diabetic ketoacidosis may occur in several settings.
It may be the first presentation of undiagnosed type 1 diabetes, or it may be acute decompensation,
particularly in type 1 diabetes, but occasionally also occurring in other types of diabetes,
including type 2 diabetes.
In a patient with established diabetes, particularly type 1 diabetes, common precipitants include
a mission of insulin and underlying illnesses, particularly infections, or vascular events
such as a myocardial infact.
In the pathogenesis of ketoacidosis, there are two major metabolic abnormalities which
need to be born in mind.
The first is insulin deficiency, and the second is glucoquone excess.
--- page 2 ---
The consequences of insulin is predominantly hyperglycemia because of reduced peripheral
glucose uptake, as well as increased hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogen breakdown.
Hyperglycemia is often progressive and includes or leads to osmotic diuresis and dehydration.
The second important consequence of insulin deficiency is the breakdown of fat tissue.
Lipolysis leads to lipemic serum, which contains high concentrations of free fatty acids.
And these free fatty acids are the substrates for ketone body formation.
It is glucoquone excess or glucoquone itself, which then drives the ketogenic process.
Since glucoquone activates fatty acid oxidation in the mitochondria of the liver and leads
to the formation of ketone bodies.
The diagram dramatically shows the two major effects with insulin deficiency leading to
hyperglycemia, as well as the release of high concentrations of free fatty acids,
and glucoquone excess driving ketone formation within the mitochondria of the liver.
Another hyperglycemia state without the formation of ketone bodies is the hyperosmolar hyperglycemic
state, usually occurring in people with type 2 diabetes.
And the difference, other than the absence of ketosis, is that there's usually a higher
--- page 3 ---
level of hyperglycemia and a higher level of volume depletion and dehydration.
And the reason that ketogenesis does not occur in this situation is probably due to
the fact that there's residual insulin secretion, which is sufficient to suppress
lipolysis and therefore ketogenesis.
The symptom of the metabolic emergencies include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, polyurea,
polytipsia, dysneal, which is shown in inverted commas, because this is asymptotic breathing.
And as the condition progresses, then confusion and coma may also evolve.
Of course, if there's an underlying illness, such as pneumonia, then those symptoms would
also be evident.
The clinical signs are those of dehydration, asymptotic or cosmo breathing.
Often, there's a tender abdomen, and as the disease progresses, there may be confusion
and coma.
Any focal neurologic sign should be borne in mind as indicating a complication of the
acute metabolic emergency.
So the diagnostic criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis and the hyperglycemic hyperosmal estate and
--- page 4 ---
DKA itself may be divided into mild, moderate, and severe forms, depending on the metabolic
parameters.
The management of these conditions is similar.
Preferably, all patients should be managed in hospital.
In general, rehydration with intravenous fluids and glucose control with insulin infusion.
Are the cornerstones of therapy?
It's important to correct any electrolyte abnormalities and to treat any associated illnesses.
Often, there's a bit of six liters of fluid, therefore, fluid resuscitation needs to be
vigorous, particularly in the early stages of the management of ketoacidosis and the
hyperosmal estate.
Often, normal saline or isotonic saline is used initially, but half normal saline is
used if there is hyponatremia.
As with all acute illnesses, fluid and other requirements need to be monitored and constantly
adjusted according to clinical circumstances.
In Finland, it is given by a continuous intravenous infusion.
--- page 5 ---
Often, there's an initial bolus followed by an infusion and a regular infusion as shown
in the slide with the aim to lower glucose by between 3 and 4 millimoles per liter per
hour.
When the glucose is lowered to under 15 millimoles per liter, slight reduction in the insulin
infusion rate may occur and the fluids may include dextrose water or dextrose saline.
However, it's important that the insulin infusion must not be stopped until this full resolution
of ketonemia.
Potassium is often high at the time of diagnosis but drops rapidly with the insulin and glucose
infusions and therefore, vigorous replacement of potassium is important and these are the
guidelines which are typically used in the treatment of these patients.
Mycarbonate is usually not needed and best avoided unless there is critical acidosis.
Monoprene is a critical part of the management of both ketoacidosis and the hapru osmolar
hapaglacemic state and should be done at least hourly to ensure that there is steady progression
and improvement in the biochemical as well as the clinical condition.
More recently, finger prick blood ketone meters have become widely available and these are
--- page 6 ---
very useful to monitor the improvement and the resolution of ketonemia.
Complications are fortunately uncommon but may include cerebral edema in the more severe
forms of ketoacidosis, the adult respiratory distress syndrome or venous thromboembolism
and this is more often a problem in those with the haproglacemic haprosmolar state.
Prophylactic anticoagulation may be considered in older people presenting with severe haproglacemia.
Neither the criteria for resoluting but much importantly would be demonstration of resolution
of ketonemia, black ketones usually should become undetectable for this relaxation of
the infusion therapy.
The diagram summarizes what has been described in terms of the intravenous fluids, the insulin
regimen and the potassium supplemental regimen.
The other important complication in diabetes is hypoglycemia.
Proglycemia is classified according to the level of the glucose itself as well as the
presence of neuroglycopenia or neurologic consequences of hypoglycemia.
A glucose under 3.9 millimole per liter is regarded as hypoglycemia if the person has
diabetes mellitus.
--- page 7 ---
This is regarded as glucose alert or level 1 hypoglycemia.
If the glucose drops to under 3 millimole per liter, this is regarded as clinically significant
or level 2 hypoglycemia and any level of glucose associated with cognitive impairment is regarded
as severe hypoglycemia.
In people without diabetes, there are physiologic responses to protect against hypoglycemia.
The first is cessation of insulin secretion usually around a glucose level of 4 millimole
per liter.
If there's continuous decline in the plasma glucose level, then counter-regulatory hormones
are released, initially glucagon and catecholamines followed by cortisol and growth hormone.
And if these measures are inadequate to protect against progressive hypoglycemia, then usually
neuroglycopenia with severe cognitive dysfunction occurs.
So in people who have diabetes, the capacity for this counter-regulatory response to protect
against hypoglycemia is impaired such as by injection of insulin prior to the episode
or therapies such as softener ureas which release endogenous insulin.
If symptoms in science are often divided into the adrenergic and neuroglycopenic symptoms
--- page 8 ---
in science.
Adrenergic symptoms in science include tremor, pallas, sweating, palpitations, tachycardia,
whereas more important neuroglycopenic symptoms in science are levels of cognitive dysfunction
which may progress to seizure and coma.
Any episode of hypoglycemia in a patient with diabetes needs to be evaluated and interrogated
in detail, primarily to determine what the precipitate was and to set in place measures
to prevent a recurrence of these episodes.
Very often, the etiology is treatment-related such as too much insulin or a sulfonalia
urea that is too high in dosage or given inappropriately such as a long-acting sulfonalia
urea to a patient with renal dysfunction, less often amnest meal and planned exercise,
alcohol and drugs may cause hypoglycemia.
The development of renal insufficiency is another reason for patients to develop hypoglycemia
after a long period of stability.
The management of hypoglycemia is largely to replace carbohydrate and levels one and two
can usually be managed by administration of oral carbohydrate.
--- page 9 ---
And this initially would require between 10 and 15 grams such as 100 moles of fruit
juice, honey, sugar or sweets.
If the episode is occurring at night or if there's a long period to the next meal then
some additional nutrient is required which contains protein or fat to provide gluconeogenic
substrate.
Mortivia hypoglycemia is an emergency and requires either intravenous glucose or glucone administration.
Intravenous glucose must be administered carefully, usually with a bolus injection followed by
an infusion, taking great care not to lead to extravacation of the dextrose into the
subcutaneous tissues as tissue breakdown can occur in the situation.
Glucuron is useful in those who are self-managing or fat the family is managing the hypoglycemia
and this involves one milligram given by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection.
Once glucuron is administered and the event recovers the patient needs to eat something
to replenish the utilized liver glycogen.
The people who are at risk for hypoglycemia need to plan ahead and consider the need to
ingest carbohydrate in situations where hypoglycemia may occur such as unplanned exercise.
--- page 10 ---
Also when insulin doses are changed then intensification of glucose monitoring needs to be implemented
to ensure that hypoglycemia is not occurring.
Patients need to change lifestyle as far as possible to try and avoid hypoglycemia as
much as can be achieved.
Thank you.
