--- page 1 ---
lecture is on hyperthyroidism.
Initially it's important to revise the basic physiology of the
pituitary thyroid axis as this is a classic
feedback loop as occurs in many endocrine systems.
In this instance the hypothalamus releases
TSH releasing hormone which acts on the anterior
pituitary to stimulate the release of
thyroid stimulating hormone. TSH then binds to a specific receptor
on the thyroid and this leads to the production of
thyroxine or T4 and T4 is converted in the periphery
to T3 and both of these circulating hormones
feed back to the hypothalamus and pituitary
to regulate the secretion of the central hormones.
In a thyroid gland itself the follicles are the functional units
in which thyroid hormones synthesis occurs
and the colloid is the site at which
preformed thyroid hormone is stored.
Thyroid hormone are primarily iodinated amino acids
and in order for this to occur iodide is pumped from the circulation
into the thyroid epithelial cells by an active process
within the epithelial cell
and enzyme thyroid peroxidase organifies iodine
and this organified iodine binds to tyrosine
to lead to the formation of T4 or thyroxine.
Thyroxine then binds to a peptide thyroid globulin in the colloid
which is the storage area of the thyroid and then as T4 is needed
a hydrolysis occurs releasing T4 from thyroglobulin
and T4 then enters the circulation.
Within the circulation T4 circulate bound with peptide known as thyroid binding
--- page 2 ---
globulin and then at certain sites
a dehydrogenase enzyme removes one of the bound iodine atoms
converting T4 to T3. T3 or lyothyronine is the active peptide
and this enters the nucleus of the cells and binds to specific receptors
on the DNA modifying the expression of genes
and leading to the effects of thyroid hormone.
The hyperthyroidism is a disorder in which there's too much thyroid hormone
synthesized and secreted by the thyroid gland.
Thyrotoxicosis by contrast is a situation in which
there is excess preformed thyroid hormones
such as may occur in inflammatory disorders of the thyroid.
The most common cause of hyperthyroidism is grave disease
followed by toxic multinondylagoida, toxic edamomat
and other causes are less common.
In some instances inflammatory disorders of the thyroid
lead to release of preformed thyroid hormone and these are known as
conditions of thyroiditis which may be related to autoimmune disease
or non-immune disease.
Factitious or erroneous use of exogenous thyroid hormone would also
lead to a state of thyrotoxicosis and more rarely
ectopic thyroid tissue may also lead to a state of thyrotoxicosis.
A mentioned grave disease toxic multinondylagoida, toxic edamomat
and thyroiditis are the most common causes of thyrotoxicosis.
Some things inside relate to the level of thyroid hormone that is circulating
and are typically involved in activation of the cardiovascular,
neurologic, gastrointestinal and other systems.
So commonly these weight loss despite an increased appetite
there's tremor, anxiety, insomnia, palpitations with effort intolerance,
shortness of breath is an increased gastrointestinal function,
--- page 3 ---
sweatiness, heat intolerance and in particularly
patients with grave disease specific eye signs and symptoms may develop.
Grazed disease is a commonest cause of thyrotoxicosis and in
grave disease there are certain conditions which are specific
for this condition including acropachy which is a form of clubbing,
dermopathy of skin condition and a specific eye disease.
shown here is a rhinocropachy which is very similar to clubbing
and shown here is ergomopathy, these are two patients who have this
infiltration of the skin with ground substances leading to these raised
orange skin type skin lesions.
And here's an example of a patient who had grave
or a topophile or grave eye disease where they're swelling and proctosis.
It's important to remember that myosphenia gravis is another autoimmune
disease which sometimes occurs together with graze disease and needs
to be borne in mind where deplopia is a major symptom of patients with eye involvement.
In approaching the patient from a clinical perspective it's important to pay attention to
the thyroid gland press A and to document the size of the lobes
of the thyroid and the World Health Organization grade is a commonly used
system to document the size of the goiter and the actual grading system is in the notes
which accompany these lectures. It's important to take account of any
retrosterinal extension and a particular sign of retrosterinal extension is known as
pemberton sign. This sign is elicited by asking the patient to elevate the arms and looking for
engorgement of the external jugular. Any tracheal compression may lead to stridal.
The gland itself may be maybe tender to palpation in the inflammatory disorders.
It's very important to document the presence of any nodules
to listen for a brewery over the lobes of the thyroid noting that a brewery occurs typically
in patients with graze disease. It's also important to look for regional lymphadenopathy.
Note that a hornet syndrome usually means that a thyroid lesion is malignant
as there has been invasion of the adjacent nerves.
--- page 4 ---
Investigation of a patient with suspected thyroid toxicosis includes
measurement of thyroid hormones, measurement of thyroid antibodies,
the use of ultrasound and in some cases isotope scanning.
So of the three hormones that are measured,
thyroid stimulating hormone will be suppressed in all instances of patients with disease of the
thyroid gland itself. This is one of the first indications of thyroid toxicosis.
There is a very rare situation where TSH may be elevated together with elevated T4 and T3
and this would suggest the presence of a TSH secreting pituitary adenoma.
As the disease progresses T4 will be elevated and so will T3 be elevated.
Usually the level of T4 and T3 correlate with the clinical manifestations of thyroid
toxicosis. The antibodies are important in determining the etiology of different forms of
thyroid toxicosis and it's important to separate the antibodies into two groups.
The first is the anti-TSH receptor antibody which is a targeted disease specific autoantibody
and the second group is the anti-thyroid peroxidase and anti-thyroid globulin antibodies.
So obviously the presence of these antibodies demonstrates that the thyroid disease has an
autoimmune basis but the specific antibody helps in determining the specific etiology.
In this regard the anti-TSH receptor antibody is pathomomonic of grave disease. It is not found
in any other form of thyroid disease and hence it is an extremely useful marker of grave disease.
By contrast the anti-thyroid peroxidase and anti-thyroid globulin antibodies occur in the
autoimmune thyroiditis conditions that may also be found in normal people with normal thyroid function.
The T3H receptor antibody was discovered many years ago and is typically an IgG antibody directed
at specific parts of the T3H receptor on the thyroid gland. It is apart from being
useful in the diagnosis also useful as a marker of disease activity and very important to note
that this antibody in pregnant individuals will cross the placenta and stimulate the
fetal thyroid. By contrast the peroxidase and thyroid globulin antibodies do not cross the placenta.
The thyroid autosound is useful to determine the size of the gland and particularly to look
for nodules. In any nodule is categorized according to a specific grading system known
as the tie-red system and this helps determine the need for any needle aspiration of the nodules.
The autosound will often show increased vascularity and graze disease and may also confirm as well as
--- page 5 ---
provide the extent of any degree of retrysternal extension of the goiter.
Tocscans are used less frequently and most often if the etiology is not known and the antibodies
are negative. The most common isotope is technician 99 and these isotopes after injection
accumulate within a thyroid and provide a measure of the level of activity of the thyroid.
Various patterns of isotope emission may then occur in the different thyrotoxic states.
In general increased uptake and emission of the isotope occurs in graze disease where it would
be uniform and symmetrical. Intoxic multi nodule goiter where it would be irregular and patchy
and involves only the autonomous nodules. In a toxic adenoma there will be a single area of
increased uptake and the rest of the gland will have nerve uptake because it would be suppressed.
In a pregnant individual the patient with trophoglastic disease they will be diffuse uptake
as they will be with a TSH secreting tumor, a rare instance.
By contrast diminished or absent uptake occurs in the inflammatory diseases
in patients who are using exogenous or patients who have ectopic thyroid hormone production
or iodine-induced or drug-induced such as any odorone which is a drug that contains a high amount of iodine.
Myogram illustrates the various patterns of the isotope scan in patients with
thyrotoxic diseases showing the diffuse uptake of graves disease, a single adenoma,
the nodule goiter with patchy uptake and then the inflammatory disease where there is no uptake.
Important to look at the more common entities in a little more detail and graves disease
is the most common cause of thyrotoxicosis typically affecting young women between 30 and 60 years of
age and with a strong female to male predominance. The arginetic associations which are encoded mainly
in the HLA and other genes and this leads to a familiar clustering of this condition.
The specific cause of graves disease is the presence of the TSH receptor antibody
as has already been mentioned and these patients may be acutely ill with severe disease
complicated by cardiac failure or rapid atrial fibrillation.
These patients typically have a smooth diffuse non-tender goiter with an
overlying audible buoy. They may be thyroid acropacky, dormopathy or infiltrative of
thumbopathy however the majority of patients with graves disease do not have these characteristics.
In addition since graves disease is all in specific and autoimmune
other autoimmune diseases may occur and some examples include vitiligo, mice,
--- page 6 ---
female graves or type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Optic mark in the logoid care have a different disease profile in that it affects older persons.
It does not have the female predominance and often develops slowly in a patient
who has a pre-existent nodular goiter. In these patients one or more of the nodules grows and
becomes autonomous and secretes thyroid hormone in an unregulated fashion leading to the clinical
syndrome. Usually the level of thyroid toxicosis is less severe and because of the nature of the
condition the goiter is nodular on palpation. The nodules are seen on ultrasound and the isotope
also will show a patchy uptake as has already been mentioned. Here the antibodies are not detectable.
In inflammatory disorders maybe either immune mediated or non-immune. The immunologically
mediated inflammatory diseases are known as hashimoto's thyroiditis but may also be induced
by the use of certain drugs such as interferon or oncology drugs known as immune checkpoint inhibitors.
The non-immune inflammatory disease is often referred to as decurveins
or post-infectious thyroiditis and often follows a pre-existent viral infection.
These patients usually have mild of thyroid toxicosis but the clinical syndrome is dominated by
pain over the gland which is often referred to the jaw. There may be fever and systemic
patient may be systemically unwell due to the inflammatory nature of the condition.
The isotope uptake will be absent. The antibodies are very high in the
immune mediated inflammatory diseases and absent in the non-immune conditions.
These diseases run a course of activity followed by self-limiting spontaneous
resolution and if the inflammation has led to a high amount of thyroid inflammation
then the patient may be left in a hypothyroid state.
you
you
Dr. Peri
I think the last slide where what we can do is this start from the last slide that you did
and then I will join it together. It should work. Okay all right. It should work.
The treatment of patients with thyroid toxicosis. You need to get it again Dr. Peri.
So again Kannen. You need to share your presentation again.
Can you see it? I can see it. Go back to that slide that way when we had an interruption.
--- page 7 ---
Okay this is where I start. Okay. Can you start from there?
Okay.
Providing the treatment of patients with thyroid toxicosis.
In all patients consideration must be given to the use of symptomatic therapy
and then specific therapy may include anti thyroid drugs,
thyroidectomy or the use of radioactive iodine depending on different circumstances.
Magnetic therapy typically involves the use of beaker blockers and these are non-cardio
selective such as propranolol or atanolol and these agents assist in the control of the
heart rate and tremor as well as help by reducing the conversion of T4 to T3. Obviously patients
with contraindications such as asthma and chronic obstructive lung disease and others
should not be given beaker blockers.
The anti thyroid drugs we discovered many years ago and have been in clinical use for around 75
years. These drugs work by inhibiting thyroid hormone synthesis predominantly through the
inhibition of into thyroid thyroid peroxidase enzyme activity. There is only one of these
available in South Africa and this is known as carbamazole which has the trade name near mokazole.
These drugs are generally well tolerated they are highly effective and are extremely useful in
the management of patients with thyroid toxicosis. The primary adverse effect of anti thyroid drugs
is bone neurotoxicity and there's a relative risk of pancreatitis.
For long use over many years may be associated with the formation of a specific form of vasculitis.
Radioactive iodine has also been used for the treatment of patients with thyroid toxicosis for
many years. In this instance the radiation is delivered through an oral capsule or liquid
and the iodine then concentrates in the thyroid and the irradiation emits into the tissue and
destroys thyroid tissue within the immediate vicinity. Although effective radioactive
iodine is terectogenic and may also worsen patients with graves orbitopathy the eye disease may extend.
For those who are interested in history this is the first use of radioactive iodine
in the Massachusetts General Hospital thyroid units administered by Dr. Saul Hurts
and the use has been continued from this time forward.
Already mentioned but important to note is that the orbitopathy associated with
graves disease may worsen if a patient is given radioactive iodine and this effect may be
--- page 8 ---
ameliorated but not eliminated by the concomitant use of corticosteroids. Radioactive iodine has
a slow onset of activity and thus antithyroid drugs may be used in that interim period
and the dose may need to be repeated but only after about a six-month period had elapsed.
The surgical option of total thyroidectomy for patients with thyroid toxicosis is usually reserved
for those who have a very large coiter with compression of mediastinal structures. It may also be
the patient's preference, it may be required in the mid-traumestive pregnancy or patients who
have not responded well to medical therapy. It's important that patients who are referred
for thyroidectomy must be rendered euthyroid with the use of antithyroid drugs,
lugeaus iodine and beta blockers. Of course since the whole thyroid is removed the patient will
become hypothyroid and very rarely hypoperothyroidism and recurrent laryngeal nerve injury may occur.
So in the past it has been debated as to whether subtotal or total thyroidectomy
is required for grave disease. Now it is clear that total thyroidectomy is required
and the choice of surgery in contrast to radioactive iodine neither exacerbates
nor ameliorates the grave's orbitopathy. Looking at the specific data patient with grave disease
noting that the etiology is the presence of an antibody against the receptor. It has been observed
that in some patients spontaneous remission occurs and therefore the identification of the patient
who will respond well to medical therapy is important so that the destructive therapies like
radioactive iodine and surgical management are not employed too early in the management of these
patients. There is a scoring system known as the Great Score which assists in estimating the risk
of relapse of a patient with grave disease who is treated with medical therapy. Medical therapy
is preferred in younger persons and obviously in people who are pregnant and in those where
there's a very high risk of relapse or a very low chance of response to carbamazol or medical
management in radioactive iodine is usually the first line of therapy. Surgery is required in those
who are intolerant of medical therapy or who have other indications for surgery.
This is the Great Score is a clinical clue to determine the risk of a relapse or in other
way and looking at it another way the potential of response to medical therapy and includes
determination of scores according to age, the level of thyroid hormone, the level of the
TSH receptor antibody and the size of the goiter as classified according to the world health organization.
So an animal scheme for the management of grave disease is to assess the risk of relapse. If the
--- page 9 ---
risk of relapse is low and there's no other indication for surgery the patient should be given medical
management with carbamazol for about 18 months and in that period a substantial number will
undergo spontaneous remission with the loss of the TSH receptor antibody. These patients will then
be monitored. On the other side if the score indicates that there's a very high risk of relapse or
there's very low chance of response to medical therapy then radioactive iodine would be used
if there's a smaller goiter patients prefer this and surgery may be used if there's a large goiter
suspicious nodules or if there's the patient preference or orbitopathy.
Modular goiter is a different condition and needs to be managed differently.
Since the etiology is not due to an antibody but due to autonomy of nodules within the gland
medical treatment will control the condition but will not cure the condition.
So carbamazol can be used to control hyperthyroidism but then definitive therapy will require the
use of radioactive iodine or thyroidectomy and as for grave disease the choice between these two
agents depends on individual circumstance and patient preference as well as indications for
surgeries such as large goiter compressive symptoms or suspicious nodules.
Inflammatory diseases are self limiting and during the thyroid toxic phase treatment is
symptomatic with beta blockers and if very severe then corticosteroids may be used to control
the level of inflammation because there's no thyroid autonomy radioactive iodine and carbamazol
are ineffective in the inflammatory diseases.
Grave's orbitopathy is an important part of grave disease. It's although uncommon
it is responsible for high level of morbidity. Risk factors for the development of grave's
orbitopathy includes cigarette smoking, the more severe hyperthyroidism, radioactive iodine and
untreated or uncontrolled hypothyroidism. It's an inflammatory disease within the orbit
related to the cross reactivity of immune responses to both thyroid and orbital antigen.
A grading system is used to assess the activity of thyroid eye disease and this is the components
of the grading system are shown here. If three or more of these components are present then
the eye disease is regarded as being active. Secondly the severity of the disease need to be
determined whether it's mild, moderate or severe. The reason being that the level of severity and
the level of activity both impact on the choice of therapy. So the criteria that are used to determine
severity include the degree of liver attraction, the degree of exothermos, the degree of corneal
--- page 10 ---
dryness and the presence or absence of topylopia. And finally there is threatening grave eye disease
with the optic nervous compressed or the cornea is at risk of breaking down and this will lead to
significant visual impairment and requires urgent therapy. These are available for grave
greatest orbitopathy include cessation of smoking, maintaining normal thyroid function,
topical gels or drops to lubricate the eyes. If it is mild then these general measures plus the
use of oral selenium for six months is usually effective. If it's more severe then intravenous
methyl prednisolone is required and if there's site threatening disease then surgical decompression
may be needed as well as the use of more powerful immunosuppressive agents if there is refractory
disease. The theory that is used in all the properties is methyl prednisolone which is
used for 12 weeks. Orbital radiation is also effective and may be used in certain instances in
people with grave orbitopathy. Last element to consist to even patients with but to consider
patients with thyroid toxic diseases is the acute severe state known as a thyroid crisis
and this is a medical emergency which occurs when there are very high levels of thyroid hormones.
So although there is a scoring system to standardize the diagnosis it is usually a clinical diagnosis
based on the patient's state and the level of thyroid hormones.
An thyroid crisis usually requires high level care usually in an intensive care unit or a high
care unit with appropriate supportive therapy. Aggressive anti-thyroid therapy needs to be
administered including high doses of carbamazol followed by the use of legals iodine, high doses
of beta blockers, intravenous hydrocortizone, the treatment of amo of atrial fibrillation if
it is present and if the patient does not respond alternatives include lithium, potassium perchlorate,
colostaramine and occasionally plasma foresis to remove circulating thyroid hormones.
Thank you.
