--- page 1 ---
diabetes and endocrinology and this lecture is on hypothyroidism.
Some important references which the interested reader may refer to are shown here and in particular
references made to a publication in the Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism
of South Africa in 2015 with your guidelines for the local treatment of hypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism is defined as a clinical syndrome that results from inadequate tissue
exposure to thyroid hormones often it develops slowly and is characterized by mental and physical
lethargy. Most of the causes of hypothyroidism are due to disease of the thyroid gland itself
and this is referred to as primary hypothyroidism. Much less often by diseases of the pituitary
or the hypothalamus which are referred to as secondary and tertiary hypothyroidism respectively
and occasionally there may be an thyroid hormone receptor abnormality leading to resistance to
thyroid hormones. Diseases that made into the thyroid itself leading to primary hypothyroidism
include inflammatory diseases such as autoimmune thyroiditis, post-infectious thyroiditis,
thyroidectomy, previous radioactive iodine therapy, iodine deficiency or excess,
--- page 2 ---
certain infiltrate of diseases, infections like tuberculosis, a wide array of different
drugs may lead to primary hypothyroidism. Occasionally genetic disorders lead to
hypothyroidism from the time of birth onwards. Rarely they are defects in thyroid hormone,
biotentic and relieves. At a higher level secondary and tertiary hypothyroidism are due to different
diseases affecting the pituitary and the hypothalamus. Most often these are pituitary tumors or the
consequences of the treatment of pituitary tumors such as surgical and radiotherapy, radiotherapeutic
options. Occasionally, pituitary infections and trauma may also occur. Less commonly drugs
resistant to thyroid hormone or genetic disorders may account for secondary and tertiary hypothyroidism.
Some kinds of hypothyroidism are non-specific. Often they progress slowly and they are very
often unnoticed particularly by the family and the individual concerned. Common symptoms include
weakness, dry skin, slow speech, period orbital puffiness especially in early mornings,
cold intolerance, macroglossia with obstructive sleep apnea, muscle cramps, occasionally deafness
may occur. In women menerasia may occur, loss of scalp hair, poor memory, constipation, weight gain
--- page 3 ---
and hoarseness of the voice and snoring due to obstructive sleep apnea. These are common symptoms
which as can be seen are fairly non-specific.
Many of these designs may often be missed and are variable depending on the etiology.
In many cases, there is no clue through the presence of a goiter. In some patients,
a preexisting goiter may indicate prior disease that has been treated for example with radioactive
iodine and that would indicate the cause of the symptoms. A nodular goiter may be present if
these prior Hashimoto's disease or a congenital abnormality. A smooth goiter as the patient has
previously had greatest disease and occasionally you would find that there is
pure retrosternal goiter in these patients.
So the link between atrophy of the thyroid gland as occurs in autoimmune thyroiditis and
hypothyroidism was made many years ago and this description is very appropriate
in the patient with hypothyroidism where this particular physician described a patient as becoming
more and more languid, increase in bulk, the face altering from oval to round,
--- page 4 ---
the tongue broadened thick, the voice guttural and the pronunciation is if the tongue were too
large for the mouth. In addition, the change in the mental state, the mind which had been active
and inquisitive, assumed a gentle, classic indifference with associated muscular language.
So a very clear description of a patient with hypothyroidism.
The physical time are all fairly non-futific but clues to the presence of hypothyroidism include
a dry, cool, wrinkled skin, brittle nails, coarse hair, thick tongue and a pale appearance with
peri-orbital puffiness, puffiness of the peripheries which is referred to as mixodema
and a yellowish discoloration of the palms known as keratinemia.
So this diagram illustrates facial appearance with alopecia, lots of the thinning or thinning
of the lateral eyebrows, puffiness around the eyes and puffiness of the face.
So you can see a patient with hypothyroidism and the facial appearance after treatment,
showing the peri-orbital puffiness and the coarseness of the features which resolves as
thyroid hormone is adequately replaced. The patient has called alopecia, associated with hypothyroidism
--- page 5 ---
and this patient has loss of the patient on the right, has loss of the outer third of the eyebrows
which recovers as thyroid hormone is replaced. Cardiovascular signs include a regular sinus
bradycardia, the presence of hypertension, narrow pulse pressure, poor cardiac function and in some
cases leading to heart failure with a cardiomyopathy. A peri-cardial effusion is a rare complication
of hypothyroidism. Neuromacula signs include a form of dementia with reduction in intellectual
function, overall weakness, slow, coarse speech, upper tunnel syndrome and the tendon reflexes
often demonstrate delay in the relaxation component. Very rarely cerebellar, ataxia
and nerve deafness may occur.
Let's keep that near, is a relatively common feature of hypothyroidism and the presence
of a plural effusion is uncommon. General abdominal distension may also occur.
I note this once the conditioning is considered is straightforward and relatively easy and involves
the measurement of peripheral thyroid hormones as well as TSH, the measurement of antibodies
and an ultrasound. In this case, the isotope scan is usually not helpful.
--- page 6 ---
Cardiomyint is donated to SH and P4 and typically the TSH is high and the T4 is low.
A very rare situation would be if the TSH is high and the T4 is high or if the T4 is low
and the TSH is ortho low. In the latter instance, one would consider secondary or tertiary hypothyroidism.
The antibodies are useful to assist in determining the etiology of hypothyroid states
and here the anti-thyroid peroxidase is the most useful antibody which would show the presence of
an autoimmune inflammatory disease that has led to destruction of the thyroid to the point where
hypothyroidism has developed. Laboratory tests may be abnormal including hyponatremia
due to a form of syndrome of inappropriate ADH, hypercholesterolemia, the presence of anemia which
may take several forms including normalcytic, microcytic or macrocytic and muscle enzymes are
elevated in severe hypothyroid states and usually glucose metabolism is unaffected.
The hypothyroidism is simply to replace what is lacking and levothyroxine or T4 is the standard
of therapy. So this is typically formulated as a sodium salt in order to enhance the absorption.
The absorption occurs along the entire small intestine.
--- page 7 ---
Importantly, the absorption of T4 is best in the fasting state and common errors with the
treatment of patients is the use of thyroxine with meals or with other medication because these
factors then interfere with the absorption and lead to erratic levels of measured thyroid hormone.
Yes, commonly there are intestinal diseases which interfere with the absorption of
levothyroxine and these include H-pylori infection and celiac disease.
So once the thyroxine has been administered and absorbed then there is endogenous conversion of
T4 to T3 via the di-ordinates enzymes which occur normally teleodically.
Typically 50 to 100 micrograms or 1.6 microgram per kilogram per day would be used as a starting
point. However in older people and people with coronary artery disease lower doses would be used
to start and these doses would then slowly be increased depending on the clinical and
laboratory response. The TSH needs to be checked every 6 to 8 weeks because of the time it takes
or the TSH to reach a new steady state and the goal of treatment is to normalize the TSH
and restore patient well-being. In most instances it's important to inform the patient treatment
--- page 8 ---
is lifelong and when the patient is on a stable dose TSH may be checked every 6 to 12 months.
Several studies have examined the co-administration of T4 and T3 and in general there is no added
benefit to using T3 in patients with usual hypothyroidism. In the resistance syndrome sometimes T3
is used. If the patient has got put you to hypothylamic disease then TSH cannot be
used to monitor the patient and in these instances T4 and T3 are used as well as the clinical status.
In pregnancy it's important to note that there's usually a requirement for higher doses
and the outcome of both the pregnancy as well as the fetal well-being is dependent on optimal
thyroid replacement during pregnancy. TSH targets are slightly lower in pregnancy due to the effect
of human chorionic gonadotropin on the TSH receptor and these targets must be used when treating patients
for pregnant. A specific entity known as subclinical hypothyroidism may develop
particularly in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. In this condition TSH is elevated
and T4 and T3 are in the normal range and effectively this is part of a continuum of evolution
toward overt hypothyroidism.
--- page 9 ---
The role of the lead that's shown at subclinical primary hypothyroidism is significantly associated
with an increased coronary heart disease risk and therefore should be treated according to
specific guidelines. These guidelines are shown here if the death increase in 10 milli units per
liter the patient should be treated if they are strongly positive peroxidase antibodies
or if there is a goiter high levels of cholesterol pregnancy or infertility these patients should
be treated even though T4 levels are normal and TSH is elevated.
Lastly in this lecture is the entity known as mixodema coma or a severe acute hypothyroidism.
So this is an exacerbation of hypothyroidism to the point where these
altered mental status and other associated physical symptoms and signs including hypothermia
and hypotension. This is a medical emergency requires prompt recognition and prompt treatment.
Mixodema coma is often associated with a precipitating factor such as myocardial infarction,
infection or the use of sedative drugs surgery or exposure to cold.
If you are confused with a cup tundered or comatose there may be psychotic.
--- page 10 ---
Importantly ventilation is diminished they are hypertensive, hypoglycemic and laboratory tests
measure hypometremia. The most important part of management is supported and this involves the
usually intensive care unit admission, provision of fluids, calories, rewarming ventilatory support,
intravenous, corticosteroids and high doses of nasogastric thyroxine. Unfortunately intravenous
thyroxine is not available. Some patients with non-thyroidal disease may have abnormal
thyroid function tests and this often leads to confusion as to whether there is actual thyroid
the thyroid abnormality. Typically this manifests with an low to normal TSH, low to normal T4
and a low T3 and this recovers as the illness recovers. It's important to recognise this
as a adaptive response and usually it does not require treatment. Thank you.
