--- page 1 ---
diabetes and endocrinology and this lecture is on lipid disorders and the metabolic syndrome.
An important reference to take note of are the guidelines for South Africa published
in the South African Medical Journal in 2018 and people are encouraged to access these guidelines
and to read them. So as a reminder, look at are usually in the form of like a protein
and this is because of the fact that lipids are not water soluble and they require the addition
of surface proteins in order to make them water soluble such that they may circulate
and these surface proteins are known as apoliper proteins. So the different lipid particles
are classified according to the size as well as the different apoliper proteins which cover the
lipid. Color microns are large particles which are rich in triglycerides. Very low-density
lipoproteins are also large particles which contain both triglyceride and cholesterol.
Intermediate density, low-density and high-density lipoprotein predominantly consist of cholesterol.
Each of these peptides, each of these particles rather, has their own apoliper protein
to denote their particular species. The diagram simply illustrates the basic structure of a
lipoprotein with the lipophilic lipid core and the hydrophilic coating of phospholipid
and apoliper proteins. A broad overview of the metabolism of lipids involves two pathways.
The first is the ingestion of dietary fat. In the intestine enzymes break down dietary fat
and fat is absorbed into the lymphatics in a form of color microns to triglyceride rich
particles. Lipoprotein lipase then acts on the color micron to release free fatty acids
and color micron remnants. The free fatty acids are taken up in the peripheral cells
and converted into triglycerides. Color micron remnants are taken up by the liver and
resecreted as VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein. This particle is also acted on by lipoprotein
lipase leading to the formation of intermediate density lipoprotein which then is converted to
low-density lipoprotein. Low-density lipoprotein may be taken up either by the liver or peripheral
--- page 2 ---
cells through a specific receptor and in the periphery cholesterol recirculates via high-density
lipoprotein. Let's draw this synthesized from acetyl CoA through a series of steps
with the rate limiting enzyme being hydroxymethal glutarhalcoenzyme A, HMG CoA reductase.
This enzyme is very important to know because this is the target of the commonly used
lipid-lowering agents known as the statins. It's important of lipid disorder relates to
the consequence of dyslipidemia and the brunt is predominantly borne by the cardiovascular system.
Cardiovascular disease is one of the leading causes of death worldwide and one of the primary
risk factors for this is dyslipidemia. Other risk factors would include increased body weight,
the presence of hypertension, cigarette smoking and diabetes mellitus, but a significant component
is conferred by elevated lipid levels. Furthermore, treatment of abnormal hyperlipidemia lowers
cardiovascular disease mortality. In the coronary artery, lipids are deposited
in the endothelium and gradually form a plaque which is usually stable and as can be seen,
this plaque then narrows the arterial lumen. An acute coronary event would occur
when this plaque ruptures, exposing thrombogenic particles to the blood which is flowing through
the lumen and that leads to an acute clot formation and acute occlusion of this artery.
So although the lipids are the underlying basis, it is a rupture of the plaque that often leads
to the acute event. So lipids have been measured by laboratories worldwide for many years
and in general, the process is well regulated and well standardized with the exception of the
measurement of low-density lipoprotein. The odd difficulties with the measurement of
low-density lipoprotein and therefore it is usually estimated from an equation which is known as
the feet of alt equation. The specific equation is shown here and as you can see,
the triglycerides are part of the equation and therefore if the significant elevation of triglycerides,
the equation is invalid. In this instance, the lab needs to measure directly on the old levels.
--- page 3 ---
The lipid disorders may be classified as being primary usually due to a genetic disorder or secondary
where another condition leads to elevation of serum lipids. Furthermore, each entity may be
classified as pure hypercholesterolemia, pure hypertroglyceridemia or a mixture of both.
These are the common primary lipid disorders and an important entity to be aware of
is familial hypercholesterolemia because of the prevalence of this condition in South Africa.
Other conditions are less common and affect different lipid particles
and are listed on this slide. Furthermore, there are several instances where
dyslipidemia is inherited but the specific gene mutation is not known and these conditions
are broadly classified as familial hypertroglyceridemia, combined hyperlipidemia or hypercholesterolemia.
Secondary lipid disorders occur in many conditions including obesity, diabetes, chronic kidney disease,
chronic liver disease, thyroid disease, particularly hypothyroidism, alcoholism,
certain patients with HIV infection and many drugs may elevate different lipids such as
glucocorticoids, estrogens, other steroids, beta blockers, diuretics, antipsychotic drugs
and some antiretroviral agents.
So usually an indication of the underlying etiology can be inferred from the measured lipid levels.
And very high levels of LDL, for example, would indicate primary hyperlipidemia or primary
hypercholesterolemia. Very high levels of triglyceride would indicate a different entity.
Chronic lipids have been, some have been on the specific lipid elevation as well as the duration
of the length of time that these lipids have been elevated and untreated.
Evidence of macrovascular disease may be manifest with angina,
low limb chlorication or cerebrovascular events.
Hypertroglyceridemia may cause pancreatitis and therefore manifest with abdominal pain.
Physical signs include tissue deposition of cholesterol leading to
--- page 4 ---
xantholasma, tendon xanthometer, other forms of xanthometer and soft tissues,
high triglycerides and the retinal vessels causing lipimia, retinitis,
corneal arcus, arterial narrowing may lead to the presence of buoys or axial pulses
and particularly with familial hypercholesterolemia.
Signs of aortic valve stenosis may occur and he petalsplinamegalemia occur with these
hypertroglyceridemia. Here are some images showing some of the clinical features.
Panel A shows xantholasma, panel B shows a corneal arcus, panel C shows tendons and
thomata in the hand and panel D shows Achilles tendons and thomata.
These are important to note as specific signs of familial hypercholesterolemia.
Eruptil and thomata and lipimia retinalis are important physical signs of hypertroglyceridemia.
So the clinical approach to patients with suspected look at disorders
starts with a screening process. If there's a family history of a known primary look at disorder,
in screening for dyslipidemia would start at an early age. Similarly, if this premature vascular
disease such as occurs in a father under 55 years or a mother under 65 years of age,
then the offspring would be screened for lipid disorders at an early age.
Any adult over 40 years of age should have lipids measured or if any of the risk factors
are present over 20 years of age, these in these instances lipids should be measured.
Once the lipids are known, then the impact of these lipids needs to be determined
through the use of a scoring system. Here in South Africa, we have adopted the use of the
framing risk score and this score uses clinical and laboratory variables to estimate the risk
of vascular disease over the following 10 years. The level of this risk then informs the management
decisions. So the variables that are included in the score include the patient's age,
the gender, the level of total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol, the level of blood pressure
--- page 5 ---
or treatment for hypertension and the smoking status. However, if the person has a very high
vascular risk, then the scoring system is invalid. These patients include those with
cardiovascular disease, patients with type 2 diabetes and one additional risk factor
or type 2 diabetes over 40 years, type 1 diabetes with evidence of albuminuria,
those with known genetic dyslipidemia patients with chronic kidney disease
and patients who have got plaque on imaging studies. Scoring is also not needed for severe
hypertension, type 1 and type 2 without individual risk factors or chronic kidney disease with
a GFI between 30 and 59. So here's an example of how the score would be applied in those
who do not have the risk factors which makes the scoring system invalid. If the score is less than
3%, the risk is regarded as low, more than 30%, there's a high risk and the patient with
low risk would require predominantly lifestyle management and only drug treatment if that is
not successful. Those with very high risk would require immediate drug therapy and obviously
that grades in between have different levels of both lifestyle intervention and drug therapy.
Back with diabetes, there are general principles that need to be applied in the management of
dyslipidemia in all individuals including a healthy lifestyle which comprises the attainment of an
optimal body weight, the use of a healthy diet that is limited in saturated fat and animal protein,
regular physical exercise, obviously taking account of any comorbidities, complete
cessation of smoking and limited or no alcohol intake. Beyond the lifestyle measures,
drug therapy may also be indicated and they are on a number of different classes of drugs which
may be used to treat papillopidemia. The common of these are the statins or HMG co-ariductase
inhibitors. Another cholesterol lowering agent is Isitamag and more recently highly effective
injectable agents for lowering cholesterol are the PC-SK9 inhibitors. Fibrets, lower triglycerides,
biosecid sacristrenes are used in some cases to lower cholesterol and nicotinic acid occasionally
--- page 6 ---
is used to lower cholesterol. So as mentioned already, the statins are inhibitors of the rate
limiting enzyme of cholesterol biosynthesis namely HMG co-ariductase. So inhibition of cholesterol
synthesis reduces hepatic LDL low-density-lapper protein synthesis. The hepatocytes respond to
this by increasing LDL receptor expression and therefore remove more LDL from the circulation
and lower the blood level of LDL. Some examples of the statins are similar statin,
a torvastatin, rose-soothastatin and a pravastatin and these drugs have been used for many years
efficacy of the statins has been clearly shown in many clinical trials and major analyses
and these drugs are effective in reducing cardiovascular disease as primary prevention in
other words in people who have not had a previous cardiac event as well as secondary prevention
in other words following an acute cardiac event. It's estimated that each 1 millimole
per liter reduction in LDL cholesterol lowers all cause mortality by 10% to cardiovascular
death by 20% coronary events by 23% and stroke by 17%.
If any drug adverse effects may occur and fortunately these are uncommon the patients may
complain of muscle pain and although myelgea is quite a common complaint with the use of these
agents severe muscle injury may occur and redder myeluses may result from the use of the statins.
So bearing this in mind is important to initiating therapy in patients and measurement of the
muscle enzyme should ideally be checked before starting therapy and obviously checked if the
patient complains of severe muscle pain. If the patient does complain of muscle pain and the
creating kinase is elevated five times above normal therapy must be stopped and alternative
therapies must be considered. Side effects are less common including raised liver
enzymes and a slightly increased risk of diabetes mellitus.
In some patients the adverse effects may be precipitated by drug and food interactions
and one of the food items that should be avoided in these patients is the ingestion of grapefruit.
--- page 7 ---
A different agent with also lower cholesterol is azetamut and this effectively impairs the
absorption of cholesterol from the gut. It binds to a specific receptor and inhibits the absorption
of cholesterol. This leads to upregulation of LDL receptors like with the statins and therefore
lowering of LDL by an increased clearance. So it is not as powerful in cholesterol lowering as
the statins but is about 20% reduction in LDL cholesterol. These drugs are well tolerated or
the strong rather is well tolerated and has been shown to effectively lower cardiovascular disease.
The new agent is the treatment of hypocholestralemia that have entered the clinical arena are the PCSK9
inhibitors. PCSK9 standing for pro protein, conveterase, subtilizing kegs and type 9.
So this is an injectable peptide, a monoclonal antibody which binds to the LDL receptors on
the surface of the hepatocyte and the normal circumstances leading to degradation of the receptor.
By inhibiting this process with this drug the LDL receptor is not degraded and is increased clearance
of LDL from the circulation. These are highly effective agents and up to 70% reduction in
circulating LDL cholesterol may occur. Some reduction in triglycerides also is seen with the
use of PCSK9 inhibitors. I grammatically chose the acronym of the PCSK9 inhibitors
with the monoclonal antibody shown in the red Y-shaped structure prevents LDL receptor degradation
and increases the clearance of LDL from the circulation.
So the clinical efficacy of PCSK9 inhibitors has been unequivocally demonstrated in both clinical
trials and meta-analysis with impressive reduction in all course mortality, cardiovascular mortality
and myocardial infarction. These drugs tend to be well tolerated. They do not have the
side effect profile that occurs with the statins and the most common effect is injection site local
reaction. As mentioned earlier the vibrates are used predominantly to treat patients with
hypertriglyceridemia and these work by stimulating peroxisone proliferated activated receptor alpha
which regulates gene products in the metabolism of triglycerides and HDL cholesterol.
--- page 8 ---
So these may lower triglyceride levels by up to 50% and the example which is available in the
quasulinatal department of health is visa-fibrate.
Occasionally adverse effects may occur like there's the elevation of liver enzymes and
creatine kinase as well as levels, increased levels of creatinine and homocysteine levels.
There's a much lower risk of muscle pain with these agents as compared to the statins
but all storms and venous thromboces may occur. So the risk of muscle injury
is enhanced if statins are used together with vibrates particularly with a fibrate known as
GEM fibrozole. That's a requirement to help lower cholesterol by interfering with the
enterohypatic circulation and these have a limited efficacy but the adverse effect is
elevation of serum triglycerides. An example here would be oleptiramine.
Niacin luteus oleol and oleol cholesterol in the liver and is effective in lowering both
triglycerides and cholesterol but is limited by the side effect of flashing and some degree of
liver injury. As a general scheme the management of hypercholesterolemia includes the use of lifestyle
measures of diet and exercise and then initiating treatment with a statin, increasing to the maximal
tolerate dose to achieve the LDL cholesterol target. If this does not occur then easy to
mark could be added and if that combination does not control cholesterol then a PCSK9 inhibitor
or cholesteramine could be added. Some individual conditions are important to consider.
The first of these is familial hypercholesterolemia because of the prevalence in South Africa and
this is an autosomal co-dominant disorder in which there are genetic abnormalities either
of the LDL receptor or apple apoprotein B or PCSK9. So homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia has
a prevalence of 1 in 1 million but in the heterozygous form is far more common 1 in 200 to 600 individuals.
Connected this patient had pendants and pomata early aggressive cardiovascular disease
and aortic or super aortic valvulus denosis. The laboratory test showed very high levels
--- page 9 ---
of LDL cholesterol with normal triglycerides.
And the goal of treatment is to lower LDL cholesterol by more than 50 percent and this will require
high intensity statins plus is eczema often additionally with the requirement for PCSK9
inhibitors and if this is not effective then physical removal of the lipids with lipoprotein
apheresis may be required. A very really liver transplantation may be necessary in patients
with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Other graduates are edemia, many fists in different
ways. First of all it may be due to a primary gene disorder but more commonly it is seen as a
consequence of other conditions like obesity, diabetes, alcohol, excess and certain drugs
as are listed here. This manifests clinically with different deposition of fatty tissue
particularly eruptive and tuboe eruptive xanthometer which are depicted in the image.
If the fungi are examined and they are very high levels of triglyceride and
mochi appearance to the vessels is referred to as lipimia retimellis.
Epetta spleenomegaly may occur, pancreatitis is a risk if the triglycerides exceed 10 millimole
per liter and premature cardiovascular disease may also occur with pure hypertriglycerinemia.
The cornerstone of treatment is dietary fat restriction. Omega-3 fatty acids
do help in the lowering of VLDL secretion and the drugs that are useful here are the fibrates,
visa-fibrate, phenin-fibrate, chemfibrasal, niacin may also be used and if hypertriglycerinemia is
associated with hyperglycemia in diabetes then insulin therapy is effective in the management.
Moving away from the lipid disorders to the metabolic syndrome.
This is not a single disease entity but a clustering of cardiovascular risk factors
including insulin resistance, abnormalities of glucose metabolism,
obesity, atherogenic dyslipidemia and hypertension
and the overlap and interrelationship between these entities has led to the formation of this
--- page 10 ---
concept of a syndrome made up of the clustering of these conditions. There are specific criteria
for the diagnosis of the metabolic syndrome the most recent of which are known as the
harmonized criteria. So three of these entities are required for the diagnosis of the metabolic
syndrome either an increased waste circumference, elevated serum triglycerides or treatment for
hypertriglycerinemia, low HDL cholesterol, hyperglycemia or hypertension.
So the clinical features are not specific but relate to the entities that form the
components of the metabolic syndrome. Typically there's central or visceral adiposity
the central obesity is hypertriglycerinemia with a low HDL cholesterol and atherogenic
small dense LDL cholesterol. Hypertension with the clinical signs that occur with
longstanding hypertension is markers of endothelial dysfunction leading to
vascular events, activation of the renin angiotensin system and probably abnormalities of the microbiome
which is the colony of bacteria that reside in the gut. This diagram shows the complexity
of the interrelationship between all of these factors that ultimately generate the metabolic
syndrome. The dominant features include visceral adiposity, upregulation of the renin angiotensin
system, inflammatory mediators, bromb visceral fatty tissue leading to numerous neurohural
activation, chronic inflammation and insulin resistance. The treatment here focuses on
the individual components of the disease as with diabetes and dyslipidemia lifestyle management
is critical and includes diet, exercise, cessation of smoking, limited or no alcohol intake
and in the individual components of the syndrome are independently addressed through optimal weight
management, treatment of dyslipidemia, treatment of hyperglycemia and control of hypertension.
Thank you.
Okay, Candin, I think we're done.
