--- page 1 ---
on the treatment of diabetes mellitus, including both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
An important reference for people to be aware of, which is freely available,
is the publication in the Journal of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes of South Africa,
the details of which are shown on the slide here. Although this is somewhat dated now,
there is a process underway of updating these guidelines, but many of the guidelines remain
relevant and people are encouraged to download and to examine these guidelines.
So when encountering a patient with probable diabetes mellitus, the first part is to confirm
the diagnosis and this would have been given in a previous lecture, including both glucose
tolerance tests and the use of hemoglobin A1c as well as random glucose parameters.
So the diagnosis needs to be conclusively established, following which an attempt needs to be made
to classify the type of diabetes using the World Health Organization Classification Scheme.
At the time of diagnosis, it's important to determine whether there are any
diabetes-associated complications and if there are any comorbidities, as these may impact on
treatment decisions. Later after, a treatment strategy is formulated, including initial management
with therapy directed against the specifics of the patient and a follow-up schedule is
designed and most importantly, treatment targets need to be given to the individual patients,
so they are aware of how they are doing. Overall, the aims of therapy include lifestyle changes,
prevention of acute complications of diabetes, very importantly to prevent chronic complications
of diabetes, and the process of treatment to avoid aatrogenic hypoglycemia as well as to control
lipids and blood pressure and any other factors that impact on the general well-being of the patient.
When the glycemic control is being assessed, there are several measures that are used,
including the techniques of self-monitoring of blood glucose as well as laboratory tests,
which include hemoglobin A1c and fructose amine. Most patients will do
fingerprint glucose monitoring, which measures glucose in capillary blood and the health
--- page 2 ---
practitioner will advise the patient on specific times at which glucose monitoring will be undertaken
depending on the specifics for that patient. There are numerous continuous glucose monitoring
devices which are available and these devices measure glucose in interstitial fluid and not blood
and therefore they show a slight difference to the capillary or plasma glucose levels. However,
they are extremely useful in showing glucose trends as well as for measurements of hyper and
hypoglycemic events. Self-monitoring of glucose is very important when insulin is being used
as it allows some level of autonomy and self-taturation of insulin doses and in general,
it is advised that the patient with diabetes should aim for more than 70% of the glucose readings
being within the target range. Self-monitoring is limited efficacy if the patient is only using
oral therapy. Even though the glucose goals are provided in the same document that was alluded to
earlier, with a fasting or pre-mill glucose between 4.7 millimole per liter and a post-mill glucose
under 10 millimole per liter. With the measurement ofoglobin A1c and fructose amine,
it's important to understand that glucose binds to proteins in a non-insimatic reaction
creating these glycated peptides. They are both important in diabetes monitoring for different
reasons. Hemoglobin A1c is the global standard in the monitoring of glycemic control and reflects
average blood glucose for between 4 and 6 weeks prior to the test being done.
It's measured as a percentage of total red blood cells or more recently is reflected as an absolute
concentration with the units being millimoles per mole. The normal hemoglobin A1c in a person
without diabetes is between 5 and 6% or 20 to 42 millimoles per mole.
The aim of semi-control and treatment of diabetes is to bring hemoglobin A1c down to as close to
normal as possible without hypoglycemia. But in general, the target in diabetes is less than or
equal to 7% or 53 millimoles per mole for most people with diabetes.
Hemoglobin A1c may not be used in certain situations such as those who have an abnormal hemoglobin
such as thalassemia or hemoglobin S disease, patients with chronic renal failure or anemia,
--- page 3 ---
and in these instances, the fructose amine may be a useful measure of glycemic control.
In the treatment of people with diabetes, it's important to individualize targets based on
co-morbidities and other factors, and this table is drawn from the same guidelines,
showing examples whereby the hemoglobin A1c target may be more stringent or maybe more relaxed
dependent on other factors. It's been well established. Hemoglobin A1c has an exponential
relationship between the risk of diabetes complications and overall glycemia, and at the
inflection point is around 7%, which is the reason why this is the goal for many people with diabetes.
It has also been shown conclusively that optimal glucose control
confers benefit with regard to both microvascular and macrovascular complications
in both type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes, and the two landmark trials which showed these
outcomes are listed here together with the references.
In addition, it has been established that in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, there is a so-called
legacy effect whereby optimal glucose control from around the time of diagnosis yields better
outcome in terms of micro-macrovascular complications than a situation where there is
poorer control from diagnosis, but better control later in the time course of the condition.
In other words, a period of poor glucose control
confers risk that can never really be recovered, and the importance of this is that glucose
control needs to be optimized as soon as possible after diagnosis and maintain thereafter.
Overall in the management of diabetes, there are several important aspects which include
adjustment of lifestyle where necessary, change in dietary patterns where necessary,
the use of targeted drug therapy, and the management of any comorbidities.
Lifestyle management includes regular physical exercise, recommended to be at least 150 minutes
per week during which the heart rate is between 50 and 70% of the protective maximum,
and including resistance training several times per week. However, it's important to take
--- page 4 ---
account of comorbidities such as ischemic heart disease, which may limit the amount of physical
exercise that a person can undertake, and judgment is needed in these instances.
As far as the diet is concerned, carbohydrate intake must be limited, especially those
carbohydrates which have a high glycemic index. If the patient is overweight or obese,
then caloric restriction needs to be implemented, and salt must be limited. Of course, all individuals
must stop smoking, and they must be minimal or preferably no alcohol consumption.
These lifestyle management issues should be evaluated at each clinic visit and continued
lifelong. In terms of the drug therapy, all people with type 1 diabetes require insulin therapy.
People with type 2 diabetes may be treated with either oral therapy,
or one of the injectables which include insulin and glucagon like peptide 1 agonists.
Other types of diabetes require treatment dependent on the specifics of the condition.
Such as those who have had a pancreatic to me, for example, require insulin. Those patients
with certain subtypes of maturity, onset, diabetes of the young are best treated with
south and eye areas. The reason that insulin is essential for all people with type 1 diabetes
relates to the pathophysiology. Type 1 diabetes is an organ specific autoimmune disease in which
there's targeted selective destruction of pancreatic beta cells. And this is mediated by both
humeral and cellular immunity. As a measure of the immunity, autoantibodies are detectable in
the serum of these patients. And there are four commonly measured
eyelid autoantibodies, including the anti-insulin antibody,
anti-blutamic acid decarboxylase, anti-islet antigen 2, and anti-zinc transporter 8.
So the autoimmune process destroys all the pancreatic capacity to produce and release insulin.
And therefore, insulin replacement is the only treatment.
T-dibt is a different condition in which there is a combination of both insulin resistance
and pancreatic beta cell dysfunction, which is present to different degrees and different patients.
--- page 5 ---
And T-dibt is furthermore associated with other metabolic abnormalities,
such as the reduced incretin effect, which will be discussed later, abnormal renal glucose metabolism,
increased hepatic glucose output, and abnormalities of glucuon secretion amongst other abnormalities.
So therefore, the treatment is somewhat different to that for type 1 diabetes.
There are multiple oral therapies available now for the treatment of type 2 diabetes,
including bighuanides, sulfonalia rears, phiosoladine diodes, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors,
dipeptidile peptidase 4 inhibitors, and sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors.
Metformin is a very important agent in the treatment of type 2 diabetes, and globally is the foundation of most individuals treatments regimens with type 2 diabetes.
It's important to understand that the primary effect of metformin is to reduce hepatic glucose output by inhibiting gluconeogenesis,
and this is the major effect. As a secondary effect, there is improvement in insulin sensitivity in the periphery, in muscle and fat, and this would enhance peripheral glucose uptake.
Since insulin secretion is not increased, hypoglycemia in general does not occur if patients are treated with metformin alone.
Overall metformin would lower hemoglobin A1C by around 1%, and the common side effects are gastrointestinal in nature.
These are usually mild and improve with continued use. However, in some individuals,
the gastrointestinal adverse effects would limit the use of this agent.
Lactic acidosis is a rare but serious complication of metformin therapy.
With a case fatality around 80%, and there are certain instances in which this occurs more readily, such as those patients with abnormal kidney function and in the elderly.
In some individuals between B12 deficiency may be precipitated with metformin therapy.
Usually the drug is started at 500 milligram, two or three times a day, to a maximal dose of 1000 milligram twice daily.
Since the drug is not metabolized but is excreted by the kidneys, dose adjustment is required for renal function,
and it is generally recommended that if the estimated lomerular filtration rate is between 30 and 45 moles per minute,
then the overall maximal dose may not exceed 1000 milligrams per day.
If it is under 30 moles per minute, then the strike must be stopped completely.
Metformin should not be used in the perioperative situation during acute illnesses.
Patients with severe liver disease and in the elderly individuals.
--- page 6 ---
The thickened agent is commonly used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes, is the group known as the sulfonalurias, and there are several examples in this group.
These drugs work in a different way to metformin, in that they bind to a receptor on the beta cell and stimulate insulin secretion.
And as a result of this, hypoglycemia is a potential side effect.
Sulfonalurias may be divided into various generations, depending on when they were developed, including first generation drugs like Tobutomide, chloropropomide, and glibenclamide.
And the more recently developed agents such as Glimyparide,
Glyclizide, and Glipizide. At present, the Quazulinatal Department of Health uses Glimyparide as this Sulfonaluria.
So the diagram illustrates the overall mechanism of action of sulfonalurias, whereby the drug binds to a receptor on the beta cell, closes a potassium channel, leading to opening of a voltage-gated calcium channel, and the extrusion of preformed insulin peptides.
Sulfonalurias are usually added on to metformin, where the patient has been given a maximal dose of metformin, and diabetes is not adequately controlled, but they may also be used in conjunction with other classes of medication, such as insulin, glucagon, like peptide, one receptor, agonists, and so on.
Overall, they have a similar efficacy to metformin and lower hemoglobin A1C by 1 to 1.5%, and these drugs should not be used with severe renal disease, severe liver disease, in those with type 1 diabetes.
In most instances, they should not be used in pregnancy, however, there are some units around the world, where sulfonalurias are used in pregnancy, and they should not be used in patients with acute severe illness, requiring hyperglycemia.
The primary adverse effect of sulfonalurias therapy is hyperglycemia, and this risk is highest with the longer-acting agents, such as glibenclamide, as well as in people who have abnormal renal function and in the elderly.
Piodlitazone is the only member of the thiazolidine diode class of drug, which is available for clinical use, and in general, the thiazolidine diones are agonists of a specific peptide known as the peroxazone proliferated activated receptor gamma.
This peptide, when bound by a thiazolidine diode drug, binds to a specific element of the genome and regulates genes that are involved in glucose metabolism.
The major effect is an improvement in insulin sensitivity, and like metformin, since insulin secretion is not stimulated, hyperglycemia does not occur if the drug is used alone, or in combination with metformin.
This diagram is to be illithread, the general mechanism whereby thiazolidine diones act by binding to the receptor and influencing genes involved in glucose metabolism.
Chaglitazone is usually foodline therapy, where it is added to the combination of metformin and a sulfenyluria.
Occasionally, it is used as monotherapy, if the other drugs are not well tolerated, for example, gastrintystinol side effects with metformin, with hyperglycemia, with the sulfenyluria.
And there are some data to suggest that ayaglitazone may lower diabetes associated macrovascular disease risk.
Ayaglitazone should not be used in people with heart failure, as it causes fluid retention, in those with bladder lesions because of a possible increased risk of bladder cancer, in those with osteoporosis, those with liver disease, and in those who are taking high doses of insulin.
Next class of drug is very important and has become a prominent part of the treatment algorithm of many people with type 2 diabetes worldwide.
And this is the group of drug known as the sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors.
These drugs act on glucose transporters in the renal tubules.
The agent binds to a specific channel in the proximal tubule of the kidneys and inhibits the reabsorption of glucose in the filtrate.
This leads to glycosuria, and because of the presence of glucose in the tubule of fluid, osmotic diuresis also occurs.
--- page 7 ---
Insulin secretion is not stimulated by these drugs, therefore hypoglycemia is not a risk.
Two examples include empagliflosin and diaphragliflosin.
So the diagram illustrates the mechanism of action of sodium glucose transporter inhibitors,
where the filter glucose is usually reabsorbed by both SGLT2 and to a less extent by SGLT1 in the renal tubules.
The drug binds to SGLT2 in the proximal tubule, impairs the activity of the transporter, and leads to glycosuria and osmotic diuresis.
These drugs are usually used as third-line therapy, where they are added to metformin and sulfoninuria.
However, like the other agents, they may be used as monotherapy if the other drugs are not well tolerated.
There is an added benefit of some degree of weight loss, but most importantly, these drugs have been associated with evidence of reduced macrovascular disease, reduced mortality, specifically with empagliflosin, reduced risk for heart failure, and reduced risk for renal disease in people with type 2 diabetes.
And hence, there are many beneficial effects beyond glucose control with the use of these agents, and they may be used for patients with high risk factor for macrovascular disease, or those with heart failure, or those with renal disease.
There's a relative contraindication in those who have a high stroke risk. The drug should not be used in pregnancy, type 1 diabetes, and acute illness with hospitalization, although more recent studies suggest that this may not necessarily be the case.
So more recently, SGLT2 inhibitors have been used in people with heart failure, including those who do not have diabetes, and there's improved outcome in this group of individuals.
As with everything, there are side effects, and the major potential adverse effects include a risk for euglissemic ketoacidosis.
Because of the high level of glycosuria, there's an increased risk of mycotic genical infections, and acute kidney injury occurs in a very small number of persons, which seems paradoxical because overall, these are renal protective agents.
We now move to another important newer class of therapies, and these are the therapies which influence the imprinting system.
The imprinting system is a physiologic system that is activated by the ingestion of food, whereby the ingestion of food stimulates the release of gut-derived peptides, which have multiple effects, such as glucose-dependent insulin secretion,
altered gastric emptying, central effects such as increased satiety, as well as other beneficial effects in carbohydrate metabolism.
However, physiologically, the effect is very short-lived and limited to only a few minutes because of the inactivation of increase in peptides by an enzyme diapeptodile peptidase 4.
It is known that this incritin effect is reduced in people with type 2 diabetes, and this has led to the development of therapies which enhance the incritin effect and magnify these beneficial effects which are related to these peptides.
The graph illustrates the incritin effect.
On the left is a graph depicting normal glycemic subjects who are given in the red line, an oral glucose load, and in a blue line, an intravenous glucose load of the same concentration.
Over time, the insulin level is measured, and as can be noted, the insulin response is much higher following the oral glucose load as compared to the intravenous glucose infusion, and this is known as the incritin effect and is mediated by the gut peptides.
On the right is shown the abrogated effect that has been demonstrated in people's type 2 diabetes.
In summary, the peptides have several beneficial effects which are shown on the right, but these effects are limited to only a few minutes because of the physiologic process of inactivation by the enzyme DPP4.
The incritin-based therapy therefore exploits two arms of the system.
--- page 8 ---
On the left, you will see by the injectables which are analogs of the peptide which have a longer half life in that they are resistant to breakdown by DPP4.
Examples include laryglutide, semaglutide, dulaglutide, and excinatide.
On the right are the oral agents, and these work by inhibiting DPP4, the enzyme which degrades endogenous GOP1.
Examples include vildigliptin, citagliptin, and sexagliptin.
Looking first at the DPP4 inhibitors, the oral agents.
These are typically third-line therapies added to metformin in South Nigeria or other oral agents.
However, like with all of the agents, they may be used as monotherapy if the other drugs are not well tolerated.
These agents have a neutral effect on weight and cardiovascular disease risk.
With the exception of sexagliptin which increases heart failure risk for an unexplained reason.
Since there's no stimulation of insulin secretion, there's no risk of hypoglycemia, and these drugs are relatively well tolerated and are useful particularly in the older individual.
They are fairly weak in terms of the glycemic efficacy with reduction in hemoglobin A1C usually being under 1%.
These drugs should not be used in pregnancy.
In people with type 1 diabetes, in those who are receiving GLP1 agonists, and in people with a risk for pancreatitis or those who have had pancreatitis.
The infectable agents, which are resistant to DPP4 breakdown, may also be used with metformin in South Nigeria as well as with insulin.
These drugs, like the SGLT2 inhibitors, have the beneficial effect of being associated with weight loss, which may be significant in some individuals.
Similarly to SGLT2 inhibitors, there's evidence of a reduced cardiovascular risk and reduced mortality, as well as reduced renal disease, and specifically with semaglutide reduced stroke risk.
So because of these additional beneficial effects, these drugs are becoming widely used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
GLP1 agonists should not be used in pregnancy, type 1 diabetes, patients with medallory carcinoma of the thyroid, and those who have had pancreatitis or are at risk for pancreatitis and pancreatic carcinoma.
The efficacy of GLP1 receptor agonist extends beyond those with diabetes, and includes significant weight loss, even in people without diabetes.
However, large doses are needed in the treatment of increased body mass in people without diabetes.
The side effects are usually gastrointestinal, including nausea and vomiting, and this is managed by the initiation of therapy with low doses with slow dose increments to mitigate against this occurring.
Lastly, we move to insulin therapy, which is one of the oldest therapies available for diabetes mellitus.
And in 1921, in Canada, dancing and best, isolated insulin for the first time, and since then, it has been widely used for the treatment of various forms of diabetes in different formulations.
The chemical composition of regular insulin may be modified, leading to an adjustment of the pharmacokinetics, as will be shown in the following slides.
--- page 9 ---
And importantly, all insulin in South Africa is synthetic human insulin, and no longer derived from animals.
These are the two Canadian workers who identified the insulin molecule in Toronto in 1921.
And this is the overall structure of insulin, which consists of an A and a B chain, found by intra chain disulfide blindness.
In normal glycemic individuals, insulin is released in two distinct phases after elevation of the blood glucose.
The first phase is the release of preformed insulin and occurs rapidly.
And this is followed by a more delayed and prolonged second phase release.
If there is continuous exposure to glucose.
So these are some examples of available insulin formulations, which are important to be to know.
Regular soluble human insulin is insulin that has not been modified chemically, and includes.
The method and human, these are the trade names.
Adjustment of the peptide chain may enhance the absorption of insulin, creating what are known as the rapid acting human insulin analogs.
And there are three of these, which are known as human log, or insulin lyspro, no rapid or insulin as part and a pedra or insulin glue lysine.
Modification of the insulin by the addition of proteins to prolong the action of insulin leads to intermediate acting human insulin, known as protofame, or human in, which is also known as isofame insulin, or neutral protein Haggadon insulin.
The analogs may also be modified to have an extended duration of action, such as lanterns or insulin glaging, leavenur, or decima and deglidic.
And then these different preparations may be mixed in different proportions, the common premix preparation is atrophane, which is a 30% soluble human insulin and 70% intermediate acting human insulin.
So, insulin is used for all proteins with type 1 diabetes, as has already been mentioned, as well as in persons with type 2 diabetes, where there's poor glucose control, despite maximal oral therapy, or in the perioperative situation.
In acute illnesses, and usually in pregnancy.
Important, it is important to note that in type 1 diabetes, insulin is needed for survival of the affected person.
And in people with type 1 diabetes, the replacement of insulin is best accomplished with what is known as the basal bolus regimen, or with the continuous subcutaneous infusion using an automated.
And automated pump device.
Basal bolus insulin is widely used around the world and includes 1 or 2 intermediate or long acting insulin injections with rapid acting insulin at email.
And the regimen is illustrated here, where you can see in green, basal insulin, and in yellow, the different bolus doses, given at the different wheel times.
This is an attempt to mimic as far as possible the physiologic response.
Insulin is injected into a subcutaneous tissue, and this diagram shows sites, which are typically used for the subcutaneous injection of insulin.
--- page 10 ---
Here is an example of an insulin, where a pre filled syringe delivers insulin at a set rate with automated meal time boluses.
So people with type 1 diabetes may present with acute metabolic instability.
And after these patients have been stabilized insulin is administered with a total daily dose of 0.6 units per kilogram usually divided into half basal and half bolus.
And they're after modified according to the glucose levels and the responses.
Most people with type diabetes often continue with oral therapies and have insulin added in different regimens.
The common insulin regimen, the youth and people with type 2 diabetes, where a single basal injection is added to existing oral therapy.
This aims to limit overnight hepatic glucose output, leading to control of fasting glucose and allowing the oral agents then to manage the daytime glucose loads.
As with all insulin injections, there is a risk for hypoglycemia and with this regimen, the risk is around 2 to 3am in the morning.
Here is an example of the use of the premixed regimen, such as after fame, which is 70% intermediate acting and 30% short acting.
In this regimen, typically two thirds is given in the morning and one third is given in the evening.
This is predominantly long acting insulin and therefore late morning and late night hyperglycemia is a risk with this regimen.
As for type 1 diabetes, the basal bolus regimen may also be used, and this diagram illustrates the basal bolus insulin regimen with long acting basal injections and meal term bolus doses.
The diabetes is managed differently to type 1 diabetes with initial therapy, including metformin, as well as lifestyle and management of co morbidities.
Metformin is titrated to the maximal tolerated dose or the maximal recommended dose.
The passemia control is not adequate. In a second, oral agent is usually added, which is often a sulfanate area that may include a DPP4 inhibitor or an SGLT2 inhibitor, or pyrogate zone, according to individual characteristics.
If the two drugs do not achieve control, a third oral agent is added.
If this combination does not achieve control, then injectables are added either basal insulin or a GLP1 receptor agonist.
And finally, basal bolus or intensive insulin therapy would be implemented if the remains poor glucose control.
These are the other parameters that need to be controlled, including the lipid levels, the blood pressure, body weight, cessation of smoking, limitation of alcohol intake, and aspirin is no longer recommended for primary prevention, but is definitely required if the patient has had a macro vascular event.
