--- page 1 ---
and HIV-related diarrhea.
So I'm Dr. Coitila from the Department
of Pasture and Terminology.
So what is diarrhea?
Diarrhea is defined as passage of abnormally liquid
or unformed stools at increased frequency.
Increased frequency can mean in terms of the stools,
more than three stools per day,
or increased volume of more than 200 mils per day.
So it can be any combination of the above,
whether it's the increased stools or the increased volume.
So diarrhea can be classified into acute,
persistent or chronic.
So acute is when you have the symptoms
for less than two weeks,
while persistent is more than 14 days,
but fewer than 30 days,
then chronic is more than four weeks.
So if you look in terms of diarrhea,
there's an imbalance between secretion and absorption.
So this equals diarrhea.
So if you can look at this image,
you see that in terms of ingestion and secretion,
you've got about a total of about 9.3 liters
in terms of ingestion and secretion.
So saliva, you secret about one litre of saliva,
you ingest up to 2.3 liters of liquids.
And then you also secret about two liters of gastric juice,
one litre of bile and pancreatic juice and so on.
And in terms of absorption,
at the small intestines,
they absorbed a bulk of the fluids,
which is about 8.3 liters.
And then the large intestines are about 0.9.
So if you look at the balanced total ingestion
and secretion is about 9.3 liters,
and then they're absorbed is about 9.2 liters
and excreted is about 0.91 liters.
So when there's a fluid imbalance of this
with this less ejection and secretion,
so less absorption and more than this equals to diarrhea.
So in terms of classification,
as I've said, you can classify in terms of hutes to chronic.
So the duration of chronic was that it's less than 14 days.
So your acute is less than 14 days,
while chronic is more than 30 days.
Patients with acute diarrhea,
they tend to have complications of dehydration
and abnormal electrolytes.
While those of chronic,
they tend to present with malnutrition
and impaired quality of life.
The usual course for acute diarrhea is self-limiting,
but with chronic they tend to need therapy.
And in acute, the setting is an outbreak,
the tense when outbreak or an epidemic
and 90% of the causes are infectious.
So for example, if you look at an outbreak cholera,
while in chronic, you'll find that there's a family history
of diarrhea, whether it's a family history
of inflammation about disease
and about more than 90% of the causes are not infectious.
And the acute is referred to as astroenteritis,
while chronic is referred to as persistent
--- page 2 ---
or protracted diarrhea.
If you look in terms of again of the classification of diarrhea,
the diarrhea tends to be watery, watery diarrhea,
then this can, especially if it's non-bloody,
it can be divided into osmotic,
this is secretory, but I'll go into all that a little bit later.
And then you can also dysentery,
which is when this diarrhea was visible blind,
and then you can have inflammatory or fatty,
or it can be a mixture.
And then you can also have epidemiological diarrhea,
where there's travelers diarrhea, HIV related,
diabetic or epidemic, or if there's an institution,
like an old age home or whether there's an outbreak
in terms of a certain area, so in an institution,
or even in a hospital.
So what are the characteristics in terms of the small bowel
and the large bowel when it comes to diarrhea?
If you're looking at the small bowel,
it tends to be watery and large volumes.
And it makes sense in terms of the large volumes,
because in the previous picture I showed that most of the absorption
happens in that small bowel.
So large volume, and it's associated with abdominal cramping,
bloating and gas.
While in large intestine,
there's this frequent, so the patient will complain
of going to the toilet or to the bathroom frequently,
but it's small volume if you take the issue.
So I tell you, I'm not passing a lot,
but I'm going to the toilet quite often.
And it's often painful bowel movements.
But here, they don't complain so much of cramping or bloating
and gas, and there's compared to small bowel.
Small bowel is associated with fever,
and this really, fever is really,
sorry, a significant symptom,
and a blood or inflammatory cells in the stool are really identified.
While in large bowel, there's fever,
and there's bloody or mucoid stools,
which are common and red-black cells,
which can be seen as well if you take the stool
and send it to the lab for my prescription.
So if you're going to acute diarrhea,
it can be caused by severe diseases,
like one of the associations are immunosuppression, HIV,
and others.
It can occur at patients that are young,
L.D., and the pregnant.
So in these settings, it can cause severe disease
or acute diarrhea.
Immunosuppression, the elderly, the young,
and the pregnant, you can also cause severe dehydration,
systemic toxicity,
and especially those patients with dysimetry
and patients that have an ability to drink
and also eat the severe vomiting.
So these patients, you can categorize them
as having a severe disease that you need to have a high index
of admitting those patients or treating them.
So the etiology, as I've said,
more than 90% is infectious in most of the times,
but you can give the other 10% with drugs,
or someone has ingested a toxin,
--- page 3 ---
or if it's ischemic related,
so you need to take a history or stress.
And the complications are shock
and the acute cellular diarrhea
and the acute setting are acute diarrhea shock,
electrolyte abnormalities and sepsis.
So if you just take a look at this diagram,
these are some of the causes in terms of acute diarrhea.
So I'll continue.
You can just look at the table and just go through the table.
I just discussed it in terms of drugs,
some of the common drugs, bacteria,
and also viruses and protozoa and parasites.
And these patients in acute diarrhea
are usually admitted if there's warning signs,
a high fever of more than the 8.5 degrees,
and there's frank blood in stores,
which indicates dysentery.
These should be managed by a physician.
Or if there's severe vomiting,
which leads to rapid dehydration.
So obviously if they have diarrhea
and they're not taking anything orally as well,
so that can lead to severe dehydration.
And also if there's any obvious dehydration,
these patients should be admitted.
Severe, abdominal pain or tenderness,
warrants admission as well.
Also, other patients that should be admitted are those
which I've already mentioned on the previous slide
with immune deficiency.
So that have significant systemic illnesses.
Or someone who's got recurrent diarrhea due to chronic bowel disease.
Because you need to admit to these patients,
you need to exclude infections like seed diff,
seed difficile, the frail or elderly,
any old patients that are more than severe in tears
or pregnant women.
And remember on the previous slide,
I didn't say these are the people or patients
that are at a high risk.
People returning from recent or foreign travel
so they can present with the travelers diarrhea.
So in terms of management, you need to investigate.
You need to do an urea and electrolytes.
You're looking for any electrolyte and balances.
There wasn't this acute.
In the acute diarrhea, they can present abnormal electrolytes.
You need to do a full blood count.
You're looking for a white cell count.
If there's any infection, a serative protein
and blood couches, you need to take stool,
microscopy and sensitivity,
culture and sensitivity,
and also stool for over and parasites.
And also to check for toxin for seed difficile
and viral antigens.
So in terms of management,
so you need to rehydrate the patient's hydration
and replace the electrolytes.
So you can use oral replacement solution,
especially if they're able to take orally
and they're not vomiting.
If they're quite dehydrated or severely dehydrated,
--- page 4 ---
you need to replace with the IV fluids.
You need to start them on antibiotics,
especially if there's a suspected infectious pathogen.
And I already said that more than 90% are infectious
in terms of etymology.
And also patients at high risk,
you can commence antibiotics.
So the recommended antibiotics that we usually use
as a prophylaxis layer and metramidal zone.
Antiderials, like loperamide,
are not recommended at all
because this does a high risk of causing toxic megacolon
and malnutrition.
So we advise against using antiderial,
especially in the acute setting.
There is a role in other settings,
but in the acute diarrhea,
it's not recommended.
Sela investigation, if the patient is still having diarrhea,
you're suspecting,
you want to do even two further investigations,
like a submodoscopy or abdominal chest x-ray.
So submodoscopy, looking, for example,
if someone has got a history of inflammatory bowel disease,
then they're coming.
You want to look for tick biopsies,
they're coming with acute diarrhea.
Or even if someone doesn't have any underlying cobobedities,
you want to do a sigmoid and check for any infectious etiology,
tick biopsies, looking for CMV.
So I told you to make up virus.
And you can save even the biopsies for MCNS,
microscopic culture and sensitivity.
Then now we're going to chronic diarrhea.
So chronic diarrhea is classified according to weather.
If the patient is complaining of watery, chronic diarrhea,
and we say this is more than four weeks.
So the watery diarrhea can be classified into
secretory versus osmotic.
Sorry, the chronic diarrhea is more than 30 days.
So secretory versus osmotic.
And also it can be malabsorption versus diatoria,
or inflammatory.
And then there's although other,
which is classified into dysmotile,
fictitious or eartrogenic,
are going through all these as I go through the presentation.
So if you look at it, if someone is coming in with watery diarrhea,
so you can essentially classified into secretory or osmotic.
So the trigger agent in terms of secretory,
essentially there's something that stimulates the channel's secret
electrolytes into the lumen.
And the water will move into the lumen and then you have diarrhea.
So in osmotic,
there's a nonabsorbed intrablonal osmotic material
which pulls the water into the lumen.
So if you think about it again,
just to explain it in terms of secretory,
there's some stimulant that stimulates the channels
to secret electrolytes into the lumen.
So secretory, there's something,
you're not stimulating the channels to secret.
While osmotic, you've got some nonabsorbed material osmotic
dietary material.
--- page 5 ---
So something from the diet that's not absorbing,
it's in the lumen, it pulls the water to come out,
and then you have diarrhea.
So diarrhea responds to fasting.
If you look at secretory, it will persist with fasting
because there's a trigger that is triggering the channels.
So one of the examples if you think of secretory is cholera again.
But if you look at osmotic,
if now you say someone must stop eating, they fasting,
this will cease with fasting.
So the diarrhea will stop with fasting.
And if you look at the stool osmolera gap,
which I'll discuss in the next few slides,
the stool osmolera gap in secretory,
diarrhea is normal.
In osmotic, it's elevated or increased.
So what is the stool osmolera gap,
which is also called the fecal osmolera gap.
So it is an equation that, for example,
what you do is you take the,
you ask the patient to give you the stool and you send it off.
If they present you with diarrhea, chronic diarrhea,
you say, okay, let's take the stool and you send it off.
And then you ask for the fecal osmolera gap.
Most of the time the labs are calculated for you,
but if they don't calculate it for you,
you send your stool and you get these parameters.
So how you calculate it is 290 million osmols per liter,
minus two in brackets fecal solia and fecal potassium.
So if you look at secretory, diarrhea, normal,
it's normal, it's less than 50, the osmolera gap.
It's less than 50, it's normal.
As you do that calculation or it comes back calculated by the lab,
it's less than 50.
But while in osmotic, diarrhea, it's elevated,
it's more than a hundred and four to five million osmols per liter.
But between 50 and a hundred and 25,
this scale is indeterminate.
So you can't say whether it's secretory or osmotic,
it's very important to, if you aren't sure,
a patient comes in, you know, in terms of history
and you take a history, are they taking anything?
You're still not sure in terms of chronic,
and they're coming with watery diarrhea.
You can ask for stool and calculate the fecal osmolera gap
or osmolera gap to get an idea whether this is secretory
or osmotic.
And you can also, as I've said,
you can ask them fast or don't eat
and you see if the stool, if the barrier passes,
if they're taking an osmotic barrier, if the barrier,
sorry, if the barrier stops, then it's osmotic,
if it persists, then it's a secretory barrier.
So you're looking at the causes of secretory
and osmotic, this table demonstrates it nicely.
You can just go through all the causes in terms of secretory
and osmotic diarrhea.
There are more that are not added on the table,
but you can go through all these are some of the common ones.
And then we'll go into malabsorption, osteatoria.
So malabsorption, osteatoria, these patients will present
with significant weight loss.
They'll have greasy or oily stools.
They'll say, oh, my stool is also floating.
--- page 6 ---
As I'm trying to flush it, it's floating.
It doesn't want to flush.
And some of them they can even complain of,
they sometimes see all the droplets of fat floating
on the toilet water.
So the golds, in terms of tests, what we often use
is fecal elastase.
So fecal elastase of less than five does show these tests,
essentially check for pancreatic dysfunction.
So the fecal elastase less than 50 is diagnostic of osteatoria.
While you can also do a fecal fed stay,
no acetyl aceto-crit.
But the gold fender is a 72-hour fed collection
of more than 100 grams on a Western diet.
But this is really used, well, I don't think the lamp
or anyone who wants to collect stools for over three days.
So we tend to use the fecal elastase or fecal fed stay
or acetyl aceto-crit.
But the common one that we use here in our hospitals
is fecal elastase.
Here are some of the causes of malabsorption.
So you can get fatty, floating aceto-criteria in many,
not all causes.
So you can have absorption syndrome.
So you can have damage to all loss of absorptive ability.
And you can see all the causes,
including cia, spool, gastric bypass.
And you can also get mal digestion,
which is loss of digestion function in hepatobullary disorders,
or loss of regulated gastric emptying
or pancreatic esochrine insufficiency.
We just go through some of the causes that are listed here.
And then if you're looking at inflammatory diarrhea,
so these patients don't complain of obvious blood,
this blood that they can see when they pass in a stool,
they say, oh, there's a lot of blood,
or there might be some blood, or there's pus,
or they complain of mucoid stools.
And they have significant abdominal pain and Eva as well.
They can have Eva.
And here, you can do fecal leukocytes
or leukocyte proteins on the stool.
You can send your stool to check for latropharyn or cuprotecta.
You tend to use a cuprotecta.
Although cuprotectin is not specific,
it can be in terms of inflammatory.
It's not specific.
It can be elevated in infection.
It can be elevated in inflammation,
about disease, any infection,
whether it's periodal.
You can also do direct visualizations.
If someone is presenting with diarrhea,
you go, you do a full colonoscopy of the mucosa
and you take biopsils, biopsies,
then colonoscopy, which looks at the entire colon,
or you can do a sigmoidoscopy,
which looks at the left side of the colon,
the sigmoid and the right side,
and take biopsies and send them for histology.
So, here are some of the inflammatory causes,
which include idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease,
which includes ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease,
lymphocytic and collagenous colitis.
--- page 7 ---
You can also have immune-related mucosal disease.
These include primary or secondary immune deficiencies,
food allergy, or isinophilic castroenteritis,
or graft versus host disease.
If patients give a history in terms of food,
that after eating, you need to take a good history.
After eating, I get the diarrhea, so that's very important,
especially if they say, if I eat, then I have the diarrhea,
so you need to associate that.
Also, although I say to you, most of the time,
in terms of chronic diarrhea, more than 90% is inflammation,
but you can also get the infections in basically,
like, bacteria, viruses, and parasites,
but these are not a lot less than 10%.
The other causes are radiation injury,
so if the patient gives you a history of radiation therapy,
or a study of malignancy and their radiation therapy,
so you need to be aware of in terms of your history
and associate this with the barrier.
Then if you look at this mortality,
this mortality causes diarrhea through accelerated castroenter cell
transits.
So, for example, post-vacctomy, diarrhea,
or by slowing transits, so thereby predispose
of the small inter-cell bacteria overgrowth.
So, patients that have pharmacology, for example,
that have scary damage, they can present with diarrhea.
This is due to the slow transits,
then this predisposes to the small inter-cell bacteria,
and then you get bacteria overgrowth.
So, mortality-related diarrhea can either be secretory
or osmotic, as I've said in terms of wind through,
in terms of causes of spiritual osmotic.
Other examples are IBS, medication.
You also have to think if the patient is completely
patient with thyroid disease, hyperthyroidism,
they're presenting with ferrotoxic causes,
and the complaining of diarrhea, you need to be aware of that,
and other causes are included amuleosis.
I wouldn't touch on diarrhea without touching an irritable
bowel syndrome, which is IBS, and functional diarrhea,
one of the functional dairies.
It's most common causes of diarrhea in the West.
The underlying pathophiles, you know,
which still remains poorly understood.
IBS, this patient is sent to present a Babdonal pain,
that is, a characteristic-related notification.
So, they say the pain may be increased or unchanged
by defecation.
So, but during defecation, the complaint of this pain
is associated with the change in store form of frequency.
While functional dairies defined as recurrent
or continuous passage of loose or watery stores
without abdominal pain or discomfort.
So, those patients will have any different comfort.
It tells to affect gamma patients
and has a long protracted history,
but there's no alarm features, alarm features,
including loss of weight, anemia of features of anemia.
So, they don't enter any alarm signs.
We're thinking of something else for my agency.
And there's no organic cause.
So, even if you do investigate, we don't find any cause,
but they deal with these functional dairies and IBS.
--- page 8 ---
We don't do a lot of investigations.
The investigations are restricted from the history.
You can tend to get an idea.
And you also need to look at other functional
and psychological disorders.
Does the patient have any other functional
or psychological disorders?
So, this is a summary in terms of chronic dairies,
looking in terms of differential diagnosis.
If you're looking at man inflammatory and inflammatory,
this table just summarizes nicely
and just looking at osmotic, secretory, monosultive,
hyper-motility, and if you're looking at the inflammatory,
whether it's infectious or not infectious,
we can just go through the table,
but it explains nicely just to get an idea of some of the causes.
So, if you're looking at eatrogenic,
eatrogenic is basically some of the causes of eatrogenic dairies
at drugs.
And this is most common side effect of most prescribed drugs
that we use.
You need to have an idea in terms of the drug
that you're giving the patient,
or what the patient is on.
So, for example, if the patient is retroviral,
this is positive, and they own aluvia,
or a proton pump, sorry, on aluvia,
then our PPI, a protease inhibitor,
that history and they say,
they're having diarrhea,
then you need to be aware and change the treatment.
And some of the other drugs that we do give even self-assaline
and GI, the patients that have inflammatory bowel disease,
can cause, but that's why we have to titrate the dose.
So, you need to take a nice history,
that's a common side effect of most barrier of drugs.
Our surgery, the patient has a recent history of surgery,
like blind group, does mortality short bowel syndrome.
So, you need to take a good surgical history.
These are all predisposed to malabsorptions.
The Christian or small bacteria overgrowth,
and some of them can also cause an osmotic barrier.
So, you need to have a good history in terms of surgery.
And then there's fictitious diarrhea,
and this is due to the intentional injection of substance
that can cause diarrhea, or other,
other, other, other ratio of stool sample,
with water, or urine, to exaggerate its volume.
And this can fit into any of the proposed categories,
depending on which substance is ingested or used to change the stool.
So, if some people can take something that's osmotic
to change the stool,
and they can present a diarrhea.
So, what investigations can you do to patients
that come with chronic diarrhea?
You can do bloods.
You can, as I've said, fecal studies,
similar to patients that present with acute diarrhea.
So, you can do a U.S. stool, MCNS,
and do CIB diff,
and also imaging chest x-ray, abdominal x-ray.
You can also do an intestinal ultrasound
to check for any bowel world bigening.
And if needed, you can also do a CT and terrography.
--- page 9 ---
APA endoscopy, this is mostly to, you know,
those that present with infectious diarrhea, sorry,
in with celiac, if you suspect in celiac disease,
you can take small bowel biopsies.
Also, if you use small bacteria overgrowth,
an apascope, sibmodoscopy or colonoscopy as well,
sibmodoscopy.
If you take biopsies, simple histology,
you can do sibmodoscopy as I've said.
It looks at the left side.
While colonoscopy looks at the full colon.
And then the last one is HIV and diarrhea.
So, if you look at HIV, it's very common.
And all, diarrhea is very common in all HIV patients.
And at some point in their lifetime, they will have diarrhea.
And I'll go through some of the causes.
It is chronic.
It needs to be investigated.
And the management will depend in terms of,
that when a low CD4 counts, you also need to, you know,
understand in terms of if the very low CD4 counts,
there's less than 200.
There's opportunistic infectious etiologies that you need to be
aware of and how to treat.
And depending on whether the patient is on immune,
on AFC or HART, immune constitution or drug-induced diarrhea
needs to be also considered.
So, if you look at this graph, I'm sure most of you are aware
of this graph depicted there here.
So, if you look at the blue on zero to six weeks,
this diarrhea is during the time of HIV-celloconversion.
This is, diarrhea is related to HIV-celloconversion.
And then if you look at about the green graph right at the end,
so at some point, the cause of diarrhea are related to the ART.
As I've said, even the ARVs, even now,
we've noted in terms of the first-line ART, or the turnover,
it's got some side effects in terms of diarrhea.
Patients do present that they have to change them.
So, at some point, or another, whether it's related
to seroconversion or ART-side effects, they will have diarrhea.
And then you get the pink or orange or red for fat,
where the causes of diarrhea is HIV disease progress.
So, it can be related to bacterial infection like TB.
I suspect, but what you also need to be aware in terms of TB,
it can occur at any CD4 current.
If you look at the CD4 current,
while some of these opportunistic infections like CMV,
make the microsporidia, microsporidia,
even GI malignancies, and some of the strong gloids
can occur at lower CD4 current of less than 200.
So, once the CD4 current is very low, one of the other causes
you need to think of is opportunistic infection.
But while bacterial infection like TB can occur at any point in time,
whether the CD4 current is high or low,
it can also need to be aware in terms of TB as well.
So, causes of HIV-associated diarrhea
is opportunistic infections.
As I've said, malignancies, including lymphoma, AIDS, and neuropathy.
Here, there's no pathogen detected.
And this happens in advanced HIV-low, stiffer current, high viral load.
But this is a diagnosis of exclusion drugs.
As I've said, protease inhibitors, antibiotics,
see the treatment as well.
And then they can also have other small bacterial overgrowth,
--- page 10 ---
where they get with gastric high co-acidity, impeds,
intestinal immunity, and mortality.
And you can also have nine HIV-related causes.
And these are some of the organisms, which I've mentioned
in some of the previous slides, viral infections,
bacterial infections, micro-bacterial infections,
and parasitic and final infections.
You guys can go through the list.
This is important because we tend to encounter this
quite a lot of patients with HIV.
And then just to summarize, we're going towards
the end of the presentation now, and the slides.
I think this is the last slide.
So, in terms of this flow diagram.
So, if you come, there's a patient that comes
with the initial care assessment, including the severity,
drug history.
You look at the CD4 count and HIV viral load if they know.
And then if they don't do those, stool examination,
you send off three samples, my cross copy for my cross copy
for OVA for cysts and parasites.
You can send for TB as well, and see difficile screen.
And if you suspect any specific biological or protozoa,
you can send them for PCR.
And then obviously, you can start for optimized ARVs,
to control the viral load if the patient wasn't on treatment.
But if they were, you need to optimize and minimize drug side effects.
The patient is taking a lot of drugs, and you suspect some of the drugs,
you try to minimize and swap that drug or change that drug for some,
another drug, that's not going to cause diarrhea.
If the pathogen is negative, there's nothing in terms of
you haven't grown anything.
Then you can do a flexible signal microscopy.
You take biopsins for histology at TB and send for culture and CMV.
I tend to get the CMV into it for hours, at most within 48 hours back.
And then if still there's nothing, you can do a full colonoscopy,
which as I said, looks at the whole colon, you also take biopsies.
And if you're still not happy, they can do a cross-sectional imaging.
If you're looking at, if you do find something actually on the colon,
do cross-sectional imaging for CT, or that CT-enterography or CT abdomen,
you look at if there's malignancy, disease extent, if there's any complications,
and specific treatment at any point, if you do grow something specific treatment,
if there's any additional infectious agents identified,
you treat those, if there's any age malignancy, whether it's HIV-associated or TB,
then you manage that appropriately.
I think this just emphasizes the pathogen-negative area.
If you don't grow anything, you do a scope.
If a colon, whether it's a signal or colon, and then cross-sectional imaging,
and then at any point, specific treatment, if you do grow something,
and you treat it, if there's malignancy.
And then this is just an aposcope and just showing someone doing an aposcope,
and then this is a colo, and you can see the abnormal colon at the top,
with erydema, some houses, and some anxodates,
and increased granularity there, take biopsies, and then that...
