--- page 1 ---
working in the Department of Gastroenterology. And today I'll be presenting the topic and
approach to acites. So, by way of definition, acites is defined as the pathologic accumulation
of fluid within the peritoneal cavity. As you can see from the pictures in the slide,
the fluid collects within the peritoneal membrane surrounding the various intra-abdominal organs.
It's also important to remember that not all abdominal swelling indicates that a patient
may have acites. Always think about other causes of abdominal swelling when approaching
and a patient who presents as such. So, other things to remember, you can use the acronym
of the six ifs, fluid, fat, phytus, fetus, feces, and a fatal growth. But within that,
fluid is one of the causes of abdominal swelling, and that is our topic for today. A pathological
accumulation of fluid within the peritoneal cavity. So, there are many causes of acites.
By far, the most common cause of acites is portal hypertension related to liver cirrhosis.
It accounts for 75 to 80 percent of cases. However, there are many other causes of acites,
and one can appreciate different mechanisms by which acites develops. So, as we mentioned,
the most common is portal hypertension from liver cirrhosis, and the basis of that is increased
hydrostatic pressure or venous hypertension. So, that's the mechanism by which portal
hypertension the acites develops from portal hypertension, and there are other causes
like hepatic vein thrombosis, IVC obstruction, constrictive pericoditis, and congestive heart
failure that are fall in the same vein by the same mechanism. There are other causes
like decreased colloidal osmotic pressure that one can get with nephrotic syndrome,
malnutrition or protein losing interoperability, or you get increased permeability from peritoneal
capillaries when there's disease in the peritoneum itself. So, tuberculosis in the peritoneum,
bacterial peritoneitis, or malignancy that it has metastasized to the peritoneum. They could also
be leakage of fluid into the peritoneal cavity. We know there are various organs within the abdomen
that contain fluid, and sometimes that fluid can leak because of various reasons. So, a
biliary leak, a pancreatic acites, chylus acites, or urinary acites. So, in terms of the grade of
acites, we can grade it as grade 1, grade 2 and grade 3. Grade 1 acites is usually detectable only
by an ultrasound examination. So, generally in men, you shouldn't have any degree of fluid,
significant fluid in the abdomen. Sometimes in women, during the various stages of the
main stool cycle, you can get about 20 moles of fluid that's found. But in general, when you have
excess fluid that's found on ultrasound examination, and it's only detectable, then one would consider
that as a grade 1 acites. When you have a moderate symmetrical distinction of the abdomen, and
--- page 2 ---
it's manifested clinically, this is considered as grade 2 acites. When you have marked abdominal
distinction and you have a large volume of gross acites, this is graded as grade 3 acites.
Acites can also be classified by whether or not it is complicated or uncomplicated, or whether or
not it responds well to treatment. So, an uncomplicated acites is that which is just fluid in the abdomen
that's not infected or not associated with any other complications like your petal renal syndrome.
Refractory acites is when, and this becomes important when we talk about treatment later,
but refractory acites cannot, doesn't disappear, doesn't go away. Even after giving the patient
satisfactory medical treatment and trying to remove fluid via large volume perecentesis,
the patient continues to have acites, and this is termed refractory acites. There might be patients
who are diuretic resistant and they have no response to intensive diuretic treatment,
or they have side effects from the diuretics that precluded use. So, those are termed diuretic
injectable acites. So, this becomes important in the, in when we're talking about management
and approach to management of the patients, but I think in general, you guys should be familiar
with the grading of acites and just have some concept about whether it's complicated or uncomplicated.
In terms of symptoms, patients are usually asymptomatic when there's a small amount of fluid
in the abdomen. They won't present with any symptoms, and when it's a grade one, a site is
as picked up, it would usually be picked up incidentally, perhaps an ultrasound is done for
whatever other reason or indication, and the fluid is noted on imaging.
As it progresses and as it moves on to grade two, grade three acites, you can get some abdominal
distinction, the patient might complain of discomfort, they might have some anorexia, nausea, a bit of
heartburn, they might also complain that after eating meal, they eat a few bites of their food
and they are satisfied, so early satiety, not finishing their meals, and this is just because
of the pressure effect from the increasing fluid in the abdomen. A ten societies, when the fluid
has accumulated to such a point that it's tense and the standard, that can actually cause the
patient to experience respiratory symptoms because of compression and pressure on the diaphragm
and the lungs, so the patient might have dyspnea, they might have respiratory distress,
they may need to sit cropped up due to the symptoms of dyspnea, so a ten societies may present as
with respiratory symptoms. The patient may also present with symptoms that might give one an
idea as to the possible etiology of the acites, so a patient presenting with significant weight loss
in the context of acites might, one might think of malignancy or TB, your patient has
constitutional symptoms, you might consider malignancy or TB, a patient presenting with
--- page 3 ---
jaundice, perhaps you would think of decompensated liver cirrhosis, so the various symptoms that
the patient, other symptoms that the patient may present with might give you clues as to possible
etiology. When it comes to clinical science, it's important to to realize that there are
signs specifically that indicate acites and usually likely mentioned because the most common
the most common cause of acites is liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension due to liver cirrhosis,
it's important to also check for these accompanying signs, so specific signs in terms of acites,
a patient might have an inverted umbilicus, bulging of the flanks and on assessment you might find
shifting downness and a fluid drill. The absence of downness, so here we see a gross 10 societies,
but a patient may have a moderate societies and actually even if there's no downness on clinical
examination, it doesn't exclude acites, so remember you might have early acites that's not evident
clinically, but when you do have clinically apparent acites, those are the signs that you will elicit.
It's also important to look for signs of cirrhosis, here we've included some pictures for you,
patient may be jaundiced, they might have gynecomastia and clubbing, they may have an
associated pedal edema, the homoeritema that you see as well with the ravenous around the periphery
with the central pallor, and then you see they may have telenctasia on their skin,
and you might find other signs of portal hypertension in the patient, which we haven't really included
but things like distended abdominal veins, patient may have sphenomegalae,
and they may present with a hematemesis from varices. Also, the patient may have evidence of
hepatic inkyphalopathy, which are important to also elicit, but by and large the most common
cause or the most common etiology for acites is portal hypertension from lower cirrhosis.
Yes, you might find other signs related to other conditions that are associated with
acites. For example, a patient with heart failure, you might find all the signs of right and left
heart failure, and they may have acites as well. A patient with TB peritonitis,
with fluid and acites as a consequence of TB in the abdomen, they may have TB signs in the lungs,
they may have lymphadenopathy, so your clinical signs are important not only to try and confirm
the presence of acites, but also give you some information as to the possible etiology. So,
a thorough examination. Also, during your examination, one would also appreciate if there's any complications
of acites. For example, a patient may have an umbilical hernia due to the pressure effects
and the weakening abdominal muscles and presents with the hernia, which may be complicated or
uncomplicated. They may have fluid that's checked up into the lungs and present as a hepatic
hydrotorax, where the patient has quite profound dyspnea and evidence of a plural effusion clinically
--- page 4 ---
usually on the right side. So, some investigations that one can consider.
Ultrasound is usually the imaging modality that we use to confirm the presence of acites.
It's a cost-effective modality, and in some cases, it can give you information as regarding the
possible etiology. It's also important to use ultrasound in guiding your paracentesis.
So, paracentesis and getting access to that fluid in the abdomen is of paramount importance,
because it will ultimately help in making a diagnosis. And safely, to be safely done,
one would need to do it under ultrasound guidance. In some instances, that might not always be
available, but we're available to always use ultrasound as a means of assisting the paracentesis.
So, it also might give you further information. It might give you an assessment of the liver,
it might give you an assessment of the portal venous system, if this confirms the presence of
spheinamigli, if there's lymph adenopathy in the abdomen, or whatever other abnormalities that
might guide in diagnosis. So, ultrasound is useful, not only to confirm the presence of
acites, but it does provide further information as well. A chest radiograph might become useful
in the patient who has complications of acites. Like we mentioned, the hepatic hydrotorax,
that's when fluid checks up and causes a plural effusion with, you can even get
media stand or shift, as you see in the picture on the slide. Or it might give some clue as to
again, to possible etiologies. So, a patient with severe COPD and right-out failure may
present to the sitees, who are patient with the severe cardiomyopathy, might have pulmonary
edema on an x-ray, and that might be, you might get some valuable information from an x-ray.
So, it's important to have these done. But I think what's of utmost importance in any patient
presenting with acites is to access the fluid.
The abdominal parasynthesis might be performed for therapeutic reasons,
but also important for diagnostic value. In patients with very large tian societies,
acites that's causing any degree of respiratory compromise, one would need to remove fluid from
the abdomen to relieve the patient and relieve the tian societies. In patients who are refractory
to treatment, large volume parasynthesis becomes part of their management strategy.
In terms of the diagnostic aspects and taking the fluid, sending it off to the laboratory,
there's important things that we request from the laboratory. So, one of the things that
it's important to have a good look at the macroscopic appearance of the fluid,
on our next slide, we'll see why that becomes important. Some routine tests include cell count,
microscopy culture, and then get an idea about the albumin protein levels in the fluid.
--- page 5 ---
And with that albumin level, as well as the albumin that is found in the patient's blood serum,
when we perform a liver function test, one can then calculate the serum acetic albumin gradient.
This is a simple calculation by taking the serum albumin and subtracting the
acites albumin, and that gives you the serum acites albumin gradient. And this is, this is
what is of utmost importance, because this will tell us whether the acites is due to
portal hypertension or any other cause, but we'll touch on that a bit later.
Other tests that might be ordered, obviously, depending on the circumstance and depending on
the condition that the patient might be presenting in and what your concerns may be,
things like a DNA cytology, triglyceride level, if you're concerned about acai-less
amylase, if you're worried about pancreatic acites, and a glucose might also be helpful
fiction and serocytous in connective tissue diseases. So there are a number of tests that
can be requested, but I think the most important thing to remember when it comes to taking fluid
out of the abdomen is that you have to send that fluid for a SAG serum acites albumin gradient
important. Please remember that. Okay, so when you take the fluid out and you look at it,
so you look at it yourself, how does it look? Does it look clear? Is it turbid or cloudy?
So usually clear fluid usually means that it's an uncomplicated acites,
in which case we mentioned the most common cause being cirrhosis, but there are other
causes of a clear site. So it's just clear, stroke-colored fluid. Turbid or cloudy fluid
might mean that there's an infection within that fluid. So there might be a spontaneously
infected fluid. The term we use is spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. So cloudy fluid may be
pointing in that direction. If the fluid is milky, as you see on the picture, the last
tube there on the picture, milky fluid usually is an indicator of chylus societies. And that's
as a result of lymphatic vessel damage and leaking of lung fluid into the
peritoneum. And its diagnosis is based on an elevated triglyceride concentration within the
fluid. A bloody tap, so a bloody fluid might be indicative of a traumatic tap,
or malignancies can give you blood within the fluid. A brown bio might indicate
bile leak from a blurry check perforation. In some instances, you might even get
black fluid. There are malignant melanoma that might present as a black fluid society.
So in macroscopic appearance might give you some information, and it's important to note
the color when you remove fluid, especially if you're not the only person treating the
patient. It's important to document that somewhere down on the notes. So like we mentioned, the
--- page 6 ---
serum society's albumin gradient is a useful test to distinguish the various causes of
societies. It tells us whether the site is due to portal hypertension and other causes that
are of a high gradient to scientists, or if it's due to low gradient causes. So like we said,
the calculation is a serum albumin, subtract the site's albumin, and if you get a value that is
greater than or equal to 11 grams per liter, or 1.1 grams per deciliter, that indicates a high
gradient. And when you see a high gradient, most times it will be related to portal hypertension.
So high gradient societies as YouTube, portal hypertension, yes, there are other causes as
you see on the slide, but in most instances, if you're getting a high sag, that indicates a
portal hypertension as the cause. When you have a low serum albuminesthetic gradient that's less
than 11 grams per liter, or 1.1 grams per deciliter, one could consider other causes things like TB,
serocytus, nephrotic syndrome, peritoneal metastases that might present with a low gradient.
So we don't use the terms exudate and transudate when it comes to fluid in the abdomen. Yes, that's
used often in fluid pertaining to fluid and plural fluid analysis. But when it comes to
societies, we base our assessment on the possible etiologies. We use the serum
society's albumin gradient for that. Patients can complicate, especially patients with cirrhosis,
portal hypertension, presenting with the societies, they decompensate, they present for admission,
and one of the very important things that you need to exclude as a cause for decomposition in a
patient like this is spontaneous bacterial peritoneitis. So spontaneous bacterial peritoneitis is a
complication of societies, usually in patients with cirrhosis. It occurs because of multiple
factors, and it's usually caused by translocation of gut bacteria through the then world bowel
into the peritoneal space and contaminates and infects the fluid and the patient presents with
symptoms of pain, worsening societies. And when you assist that fluid and you find that on cell
count, you have a predominant neutrophil elevation and you have a cell count in terms of diagnosing
spontaneous bacterial peritoneitis, the number they need to remember is greater than 250 cells
per millimeter cubed. So when your total neutrophil count, which is a percentage of the total
wide cell count, is greater than 250 cells, that confers a diagnosis of spontaneous bacterial
peritoneitis. One might also grow certain bacteria in our culture medium, so it's important at the
bedside to, if you suspect bacterial peritoneitis, and this should be done on admission before patients
receive antibiotics, one should take the fluid and inoculate blood culture bottles at the bedside,
put 10 molds of fluid into the anaerobic and aerobic blood culture bottles and send it off to the lab
for analysis as well. So you might get certain bacteria like E. coli, Clibsiella,
--- page 7 ---
Streptococcus, these are bugs that line our gastrointestinal tract and they are common
culprits when it comes to the complication of spontaneous bacterial peritoneitis.
In other instances, we are patient presents with the scientists and the fluid cell count
as a lymphocyte predominant. This might be due to TB or peritoneal carcinomatosis
as a consequence of metastases from cancer. The useful test there would be the adenosine
deaminase level or the ADA on the fluid and if elevated above the T, then it has a more than 90
percent sensitivity to that this fluid or this problem that you're dealing with is that of a
TB peritoneitis. So in TB, the ADA is high, usually above 30 and that can be helped to distinguish
between TB and other causes of a low gradient societies with the lymphocyte predominance.
Just briefly to touch on the mechanism of the societies in patients with
serotic portal hypertension. This is important because we base our treatment
and the various drugs that we use are based on the fact that the mechanism of societies
involves certain pathways and when we try and block those pathways with the medication,
it's an attempt to treat their societies. It's based on the fact that there is a specific mechanism
that societies develop in patients with cirrhosis. So if we go through this flow diagram, we can
see that in patients with cirrhosis, we know cirrhotic patients have distortion of the hepatic
architecture and they've increased hepatic vascular tone. That causes a back pressure with which
leads to portal hypertension and that portal hypertension activates various vasodilation
mechanisms and these mechanisms are mostly mediated by nitric oxide overproduction.
When the nitric oxide is overproduced, it acts on the splantic and the peripheral blood vessels
and it causes them to dilate and when you have dilated blood vessels in the peripheral system
and the splantic system, that causes under filling of the systemic arterial vascular space
and ultimately it results in a drop in the arterial pressure. So your body always tries to maintain
homeostasis. So when there's this apparent drop in arterial pressure, it activates the
baroreceptors and this then mediates activation of your renin and your tinsenal dostron system
in the kidneys as well as activates your sympathetic nervous system and causes the release of
antidiuretic hormone and all of these mechanisms are activated to try and restore normal blood
pressure homeostasis. And when these are activated, remember, especially when it comes to the renin
and your tinsenal dostron system, that system is in place to increase your blood pressure
by increasing sodium and water retention. When you have sodium and water retention,
the sitees develops. Another mechanism that's usually happening simultaneously is that
--- page 8 ---
the splantic vasodilation causes an increase in lymph production. And when that lymph
production exceeds the body's lymphatic transport system capacity, that eventually leads to leakage
of lymph fluid into the peritoneal cavity. So these are the mechanisms by which a scientist
develops and remember the renin and your tinsenal dostron system because when it comes specifically
to the treatment or the management, we use certain drugs that target certain systems.
So specifically when it comes to management of societies, it's important to diagnose
what's causing the societies. And by doing that, one can then tailor your treatment to
actually cheat the underlying cause. For example, a patient who might have TB, they need TB
treatment. A patient with malignancy might respond to chemotherapy. A patient in heart
failure presenting as a scientist might need diuretics. So whatever the cause of the
societies is, one needs to cheat the underlying etiology. When it comes to conditions like
portal hypertension, it's out of cirrhosis or various other causes of portal hypertension.
It's sometimes a bit more tricky to try and treat that a scientist because there's no specific
treatment that's going to cure cirrhosis. We know that once it's established, it is
a condition that can't really be reversed with specific treatments. So your treatment then aims
to minimize your societies and reduce the formation of the societies. And we do that by
restricting sodium in patients with portal hypertension, we restrict their sodium to around two grams
of sodium per day. Okay, so you tell the patient you'll get the dietitian involved
just to help the patient to try and limit their sodium intake. So we know that sodium is found
in many foods, table salt, various additives to closest foods. So patients need to be
counseled adequately about diet and sodium restriction. The next treatment modality to
use is that of medical treatment drugs. So the drugs of choice that we use are diuretic drugs.
We know spironolactone, which is an aldosterone antagonist. Remember, we're trying to block
that in an angiotens and aldosterone system. So we use an aldosterone antagonist, which is spironolactone,
which acts on the renal collecting chuvial to inhibit sodium resorption. And when you
inhibit sodium resorption in the kidneys, you also then inhibit water because we know we have
the sodium goes, water goes. And that's the way of reducing societies in the patient. So we,
so essentially the patient excretes the sodium and excretes the fluid and doesn't reabsorb it
into the systemic circulation. The spironolactone can be dosed, usually starting dose of 100
milligrams daily, and that can be titrated up to a maximum of around 400 milligrams a day.
Spironolactone is usually the first line therapy. And one should always be made
--- page 9 ---
away or be cognizant of potential side effects of a spironolactone, including fluctuations in
serum levels of potassium, sodium, and creatinine. So it's important to monitor patients electrolytes
in the renal function. Patients may also complain of muscle cramps, which can be quite debilitating.
So just keep that in mind. And with long-term use, or even early,
not necessarily only in the long term, but patients may develop spironochromestia as a consequence of
spironolactone use. So it's important to counsel patients and just to monitor and look out for
that, because you're giving very high doses in these patients. Firosemide, which is a
luke diuretic, can also be used, but it's usually used as a second agent starting dose of around
40 milligrams and can be titrated up to a maximum of 160 milligrams daily. But again,
when you're using such high doses of luke diuretic, it's important to keep a close eye on
electrolytes in the patient. Once the patient improves and the sitees mobilizes and the patient
improves, to a point where there's no longer clinically apparent societies, then one should
titrate the dose down to the maximum tolerated dose that keeps the sitees away. So you don't want
to maintain a patient on very high doses for a very long time. Once they improve,
you start to wind down the doses and you keep them on a reasonable dose that will keep the
sitees at bay. And it's variable depending on if the patient will respond differently or
require different amounts, but that's something that needs to be done. Don't keep patients that
have no societies on very high doses of diuretics for a very long time. The way in which you can
also see that a patient is improving is by monitoring their daily weight. And a patient ideally
with the sitees, if they have a sitees but no edema, you should aim for around 0.5 cages of weight
loss per day. If the patient also has peripheral edema, one can consider a higher rate of about a
cagey loss of weight per day. And so in your inpatient that you are managing with the sitees,
daily weights become important to try and help you to accurately assess response to treatment.
And I've mentioned that once improve, you reduce the dose to the lowest effective dose.
In some instances, patients might require large volume pericentesis, either if they're presenting
as a 10 societies or if they are not really responding as well as we'd like with the
medical treatments, they might need pericentesis to remove excess fluid.
To avoid or prevent hemodynamic disturbances or renal impairments, when we are removing
excess fluid, it's important to provide the patient with volume, intervascular volume.
And we do this by giving IV albumin infusions, especially when you're removing fluid volume
in excess of 5 liters, one would need to, which you can do safely, but one would need to replace
--- page 10 ---
albumin at the same time. So you give about 8 grams of albumin per liter that is drained.
When it comes to patients who do not respond, remember we spoke about this in earlier on,
patients that have refractory societies, they fail to respond to medical therapy, including
large volume pericentesis. One can consider other interventions like a transgular
intraepatic portal systemic shunt placement, which essentially is a shunt that is between
the portal vein or the portal venous system and the hepatic vein in the liver. And that shunt
provides an escape or a way of fluid to move from the portal system into the venous system
and reduce portal pressures and the complications of increased portal pressure, one of them being
societies. So tips work in that way. It reduces the portal pressure, reduces the
societies, but it's important to also remember the concern, excuse me, it's important to remember
that in some patients it can precipitate hepatic incafolopathy when these shuns are placed,
but there are newer shuns which are found to be newer coverage shuns that have been found to be
or stained study that have less complications of hepatic incafolopathy, but certainly the
older stents, there was quite a significant complication of incafolopathy. And obviously,
in your patient failing to respond liver transplant and should always be considered,
and we indicated patients should be referred to the appropriate center. So in conclusion,
we know that 75 to 80% of the scientists is due to portal hypertension. Remember that,
moving forward in your career, the system of classifying fluid is trying to
exaggerate is not useful in patients presenting with the scientists, and the test that we do is
a serum of the scientist's albumin gradient as the initial test. We know that a high
sag indicates portal hypertension, and we've gone through the various treatment options when
it comes to managing patients with the scientists. It's also important when a patient complies
