--- page 1 ---
Good morning. You have a brief overview of chronic pancreatitis and salient features
regarding its management. So chronic pancreatitis is progressing in
planetary changes in pancreas at the results in permanent structural damage.
This leads to impairment of exocrine and endograd function. The current, it's
mainly theology is that of the current episodes of acute pancreatitis over a
period of time. It's important to distinguish acute from chronic
pancreatitis with chronic pancreatitis may be asymmetomatic over a long period of
time and it can usually present very little fibrotic mass within the pancreas
or there may be symptoms of pancreatic insufficiency usually without pain
initially. A acute pancreatitis is almost always painful in its acute
presentation.
Chronic pancreatitis was itself to be Apache or focal disease and it usually
involves an acute diffuse large portion of the entire pancreas.
--- page 2 ---
Magnetic enzymes such as amylase and lipase are usually normal in the
chronic phase but they're almost always elevated in a patient that has acute
disease. The echologies of chronic pancreatitis is vast and of which
alcohol is the most common, less cause for chronic pancreatitis. Genetic
causes such as those with mutations in the cystic fibrosis change of those
that have a allergic pancreatitis. Those are doctor-lobstraction,
coming in tumors, pancreatic diversum. Those that have recurrent stone disease.
Those that have so-called topical pancreatitis. The pancreas can be involved
in systemic disease of which the systemic lupusoid of thymatosis is one of
them. Hypotractic sedemia should be sold and it could be possibly involved in
hyperparaphyroidism. What you mean by pancreatitis is in its two forms can be
quite silent for long periods of time before it presents and then a subset of
patients that have chronic pancreatitis for which low causes found.
--- page 3 ---
Now call abuse. Ethnol autos digestive zygone activation is considered a
variation in individual sensitivity to toxicity of alcohol. It's difficult to
define a safe level of consumption so currently recommendations is no
consumption is better. However only 5 to 10 percent of all alcoholics develop
chronic pancreatitis. It has however account for 45 percent of all cases.
Cigarette smoking on its own is independent risk factor for the
development of chronic pancreatitis. So the combination of cigarette smoking on
alcohol use in individual increases the risk for the development of chronic
pancreatitis but the overall risk is so conferred to the best then between 5 and
10 percent. An abdominal pain is a dominant feature in patients chronic
pancreatitis. It's usually a big asterisk, a lady h to the back and maybe some
nausea and vomiting. Patient symptoms is a leading upright or slightly leading
forward and it usually is worse within 15 to 30 minutes after eating. It can
--- page 4 ---
occur in discrete attacks and the condition can progress where the pain
becomes more continuous throughout the course of the day.
Pancreatic insufficiency. So clinically significant protein and fat
efficiencies do not occur and totally is more than 90% of pancreatic function is
loss. Fat malabsorption of which the arteria is a clinical symptom. The arteria
is lose greasy of bowel spallics too and the patient often report that it's
difficult to flush away. Malabsorption of fat soluble vitamins such as vitamin
ADE and K and B12 may occur and these patients are present with vitamin
doses or clinical features of deficiency in these vitamins.
Pancreatic diabetes. Spangatic diabetes is glucose intolerance due to the
destruction of the glands. Diabetes mellitus usually occur quite late and all
these patients will require instant therapy. But all hypoglycemia does not
work for them. Increase the risk of hypoglycemia because the patients also
--- page 5 ---
have absolute reduction. It uses glucagon. So it's a very narrow band for
managing the patients on its therapy.
Diaphragmatic pancreatitis is challenging since no laboratory study or
single imaging study is 100% diagnostic. These tests can all be normal
in a patient with clinical features of chronic pancreatitis. However, the classic
arthritis are of pancreatic acidications, the presence of steatoria and
the development of diabetes mellitus. However, the stress we've described is
only seen very late and in patients with advanced disease.
Diagnostic tests for pancreatic functions can either be direct to indirect,
give a direct test, stimulate the pancreas, which is a cleat sacritin or
colicosestokinin and then fluid is collected as known as the sacritin
secretion test and gives you the direct indication of the function of the
pancreas. Indirect tests for testing pancreatic function, such as two elastase,
--- page 6 ---
72-offycofat or serum trypsinogen, can also be done. Of these tests, the
direct test is time-consuming and it's only done in a specific research setting.
The indirect test, the 72-offycofat laboratory needs to be in a form before
samples are collected for this test, but it's not done in clinical practice anymore.
Diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis is usually confirmed on some form of
ideological imaging of the pancreas. So either on plant abdominal forms,
because the cases can be seen in the gland or more sensitive beyond CT scan.
An abnormal pancreatogram revealing the beating of the main pancreatic duct
stays here of its side branches is usually a diagnostic app,
ECP.
So here is an ERP, so then there's a little bit of a pancreatogram and you can see in this image
that there is dilatation of the pancreatic duct across all the way to its tail.
This is a coronal slice of a patient with chronic pancreatitis and you can see the pancreatic
--- page 7 ---
gland in this particular slice and there is multiple calculi in a dilated main pancreatic duct.
You also can see that this distortion of the pancreatic tissue.
Management of this patient, pain management is the mainstay of treatment.
Patients have to be counseled on alcohol cessation,
as well as the consumption of small meals and remaining hydrated, smoking has to be stopped
and patients usually will require some form of pancreatic enzyme supplements,
membrane analgesia is the mainstay of therapy.
Antioxidant therapy can be considered in a subset of patients in those that don't
respond to a conventional analgesia therapy.
Select nerve block can be offered for the patients.
Endoscopic therapy for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis involves pancreatic
lithrotherpsy or pancreatic ducts, standing for those that are refractory to pain.
Radiation therapy can be offered to reduce the gland structure and then surgery
--- page 8 ---
in select patients and surgery is purely to be for decompression,
the section of the distal part of the gland or denervation procedures.
These are not offered in clinical practice.
Regarding the stear-turium, the management is that of diaphragm modification,
replacing the lipase usually resolves the stear-turium,
vitamin supplementation, and in the medium term to give mono chain triglycerides,
monoclonal triglycerides or diodes, so directly from the test time,
so you do not have the issue of chylomicron well absorption.
For diabetes mellitus, insulin therapy is usually the mainstay of therapy as hypoglycemic agents
on no benefit.
As with acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis can have complications,
and often, patients present with one of these complications first before diagnosis is made.
Innovation can have a pseudocyst that has formed there over time,
--- page 9 ---
and the pseudocyst can become infected, can rupture, can hemorrhage within it,
and when it leads within it, you can have a congenital syndrome of spanklytitis.
Global compression of the duodenum or the biliary system,
as well as compression of the lumens of stomach can occur in these patients.
Here is an ERCP image of a patient that's got a bouduct of suction,
as well as of suction of the distal duodenum.
This is due to an inflammatory mass from a pseudocyst.
You can see that the distal CBD is quite dilated beyond the scope on this image,
and the proximal CBD is narrowed.
Other complications that can occur, pancreatic sitees or pseudosupps,
eruption, plural fusions can occur over time.
Patients can present from both of the swelling vein, normal anatomy,
swelling vein runs across the pancreas, and the patients can present the enthusiastic
--- page 10 ---
viruses. They can have zero aneurysms, and then have recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis,
which is usually due to that situation around chronic pancreatitis,
and there is a risk for development of pancreatic cancer.
The risk is higher than associated smoking, but it's difficult to differentiate
chronic pancreatitis from patients with an adenocarcinoma.
There's an image of a patient that has a dilated
