--- page 1 ---
Okay, we're now going to speak about reflux disease and pectic ulcer disease.
So we'll start off with advice to students from, this isn't from me, this is from Maurice
Epworth, who was a physician in the 1960s.
So intellectual ability, assuming you all have, because you hear a full stretching of
that ability by an indomitable world to overcome all obstacles to your learning, there's
always obstacles here and there, but we must try and open them.
And of course an appreciation of the area of education coupled with the desire to be educated.
And I think the odd one is quite clear, because I haven't found a substitute for it as yet,
and that's simply hard, like work.
So like I said, this is not from me, it's from a physician who worked in the 1960s,
and he has a plan in like medicine.
Okay, so let's talk about, like in a gastro, a suffragil reflux disease.
Now the people in the United States, they leave out the O in a suffragist, and it's an E,
so they call it GERD, so you may hear that term being used, and it's an abbreviation of course,
and or like in a GORD, if you use the UK English.
But it basically alludes to the same thing, gastro-sofragil reflux disease.
And what is gastro-sofragil reflux disease?
Well, plenty of us in this audience may have experienced episodes of heartburn, isn't it?
And it results from failure of the normal anti-reflux mechanism to protect against frequent and abnormal amounts
of gastro-sofragil reflux.
Now this is actually a normal physiological process, if you think about it, if you have a large heavy meal
and some fizzy, like in your drinks, it's normal for you to release some of that air.
So your lower suffragil sphincter is naturally in your competition, that's why you, like in a burp, right?
And it feels very good because you don't want to keep that air in because it's going to exit the other, like in a way, right?
So this is a normal physiological process.
Sometimes we, all of us, normally individuals, in your lifetime, you may have an occasional episode where you feel,
oh, there's a bit of acid coming up in my chest, that I ate too much, I'm feeling bloated,
and you burp as you release some of that air, some fluid also comes up and you feel a bit of heartburn, occasionally, right?
So it's normal for our lower suffragil sphincter to be a bit incompetent.
But at which point does a normal physiological process now become a, like a disease?
So we'll come to that in a second.
We know that to gastro-sofragil reflux disease is one of the most common human diseases in the world, right?
Which also implies then, it is a big business for the pharmaceutical industry and indeed some of the agents that are introduced over the years,
your H2 receptor antagonists and proton company bidders are the most profitable drugs of all, like in a time.
But it also causes significant impairment of quality of life, similar to arthritis, MI and heart failure.
So it's like common and causes significant impairment and it's a big economic interest as well.
So when does this physioheological process become pathoheological?
--- page 2 ---
It is a complex and delicately balanced system between the esophagus, which is in the ache of thorax
and the stomach where you've got your acid and digestive enzymes and fluid, right?
So you unstuff to go from your esophagus into the stomach and stay there.
Okay, whatever's in the stomach should stay there.
And to that you have the chusophtha, like a diaphragm, which interacts with your lower esophageal sphincter.
Okay, and what results in gastrointestinal reflux disease is when there's an imbalance between your defensive actors
and I just spoke about your anti reflux, like in barriers, your lower esophageal sphincter and the chusophtha,
like a diaphragm, which coordinates, right?
They almost act like an internal and external sphincter.
The other place you see an internal and external sphincter is at the anus, isn't it?
And that helps to control stool, like you know, continents.
So that is, that requires good cordon, cordon, your nation.
The other defensive factor is esophageal acid clearance and resistance of the esophageal tissue itself.
Of importance in terms of esophageal acid clearance is the fact that your esophagus can contract,
coordinated contraction called peristalsis.
So whenever anything refluxes up into the esophagus,
if you've got a normal contract or cognitive contract or esophagus, it will immediately clear it.
And of course, the other half of this is the aggressive factors from the stomach contents.
The gastric acidity, the volume and the duodenal contents itself.
Okay, so that's basically the pathophysiology.
Associated conditions that increase reflux is pregnancy, of course,
with the uterus pushing up more reflux state.
That's the aggressive factors.
Scaryoderma, which causes esophageal dysmodality, usually hypermetallities.
So your esophagus cannot contract and clear out that reflux state can lead to A-penny stenosis.
Something interesting called xoline-elicin syndrome, which is hypogastonemia
and you get increased production of acid and fluid and gastric juice.
So you're getting more of the aggressive factors.
It's a neuroendocrine tumor.
Not something we see often.
It's quite rare.
After a halismyotic before eclation, because now you've disrupted surgically,
disrupted the lower esophageal sphincter and prolonged nasogastric perturbation,
which also disrupts the lower esophageal sphincter and allows the refluxate,
more frequent refluxate into the esophagus.
Okay, so how did the patients with the gases of the reflux disease present?
They have classic reflux symptoms.
--- page 3 ---
Now, this is the one we should all be aware of because that's the one that's most frequently
going to come to you and that's going to be the most frequent,
like in a complaint.
Right?
A burning, retro-stirnel, syn-, syn-, syn-, syn-, station.
Sometimes the patients may also tell you,
I actually can feel the acid coming up to my throat.
So these are known as our classical reflux symptoms.
Less frequently and less common is symptoms such as water brash,
or dinophagia, dysphagia.
And in all individuals, sometimes they may be fairly asymptomatic.
They may not have complained too much over the years of having a heartburn, et cetera,
but they may present with a complication of gastrosophageal reflux such as a stricture
of the esophagus.
Right?
Pectic stricture.
Now, on iphagia, dysphagia, I will call them as a typical symptoms for classical reflux.
These symptoms have other important, like, causes, and I would say that those, if patients
do have those symptoms, either on their own or in association with reflux symptoms or a
history of reflux symptoms, those patients for sure should not just be treated as gastrosophageal
reflux, but they require further investing.
So, this has been around for quite some time.
Now, in 2006, people decided we need to have a clear definition of reflux in disease.
Right?
And they came up with this type of definition of reflux.
Right?
And they came up with this type of definition, which moved it from being, because they'd
be prior to 2006, everyone seemed to have their own version of what should constitute gastros,
at which point we call this Physiophageical Process A in disease.
So, it was said, if you had episodes more than three times a week or two or more times per
week, et cetera, then you'd be moving.
So, what this did is it shifted it from being a physician-driven diagnosis in others, the
physician will determine if you have reflux disease to a patient-centered definition.
And this is the definition.
It's that God is a condition which develops when the reflux or gastric content causes,
it's troublesome symptoms or complications.
And the key word here is troublesome.
--- page 4 ---
So, if it is a problem for the patient, if it's causing them troublesome, it's impacting
on their lives, be it on work, on home life, on like in leisure life, et cetera, their
hobbies or whatever else, then it shifts from being a Physiophageical Process to now something
that may need, probably needs, your treatment.
Okay.
The problem I have with this word here, troublesome, is how do different people who speak English
interpret and understand that word, and indeed, how do people elsewhere who do not speak English
as their first language understand that word troublesome?
How does that translate into other languages around the life in a world?
So, it's remained a little bit of an issue, which is how come we'll go on to speak about
what is now considered the new way of viewing reflux or the new consensus definition of
your reflux.
However, the old one that I placed up there from Montreal is, I still have it there because
it's totally helpful in everyday general, like in a practice.
Okay.
So, the Montreal Caspication went further to define the different esophageal syndromes,
and I think for our purposes, especially in general routine actors, this is of importance.
The symptomatic syndrome is your typical reflux syndrome.
That's your heartburn acid regurgitation.
This one, you can also get something called a reflux chest pain syndrome, where the main
symptom of the patient is pain.
Now, be careful of this one here.
Yes, you can get quite severe reflux chest pain syndrome, but remember, if you are in
the region of the world, which you are, where ischemic heart disease is quite evident,
then be aware that before you think about gastrointestinal reflux disease, make sure you
do an ECG.
Make sure the patient is not having any vagina or having a myocardial infarction.
Okay.
And then there's syndrome associated with esophageal injury that they put into a group,
and this is basically where there is structural changes to the esophagus itself.
So, you can get erosions, and there's grading for that, reflux of a dietis, long-standing reflux.
It hasn't been treated well, can result in a stricture, and those patients with a phagia.
Or the esophageal epithelium itself can change to something called a Barrett esophagus,
which I'll speak about briefly later, which is where the enormous, normal squamous epithelium
has now changed to a columnar type epithelium, and it is a pre-neoplastic lesion that puts patients
at risk for a esophageal adenocarcinoma.
So, this can lead to a type of cancer called an adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.
--- page 5 ---
In Sub-Saharan Africa, the type of tumors of the esophagus we see in the esophagus is usually squamous.
But if it's associated with your reflux, it's an adenocarcinoma.
Okay.
And these I wouldn't concern myself with too much.
These are so-called extra esophageal syndromes that can be associated with your reflux.
And I think there's a fair amount of this agreement here, but whether these associations,
so-called established associations are well-validated in terms of your research.
For example, so-called reflux asthma syndrome.
Now, asthma is something that occurs quite frequently and is highly prevalent in the general population.
So, is gastrosophageal reflux disease?
So, it isn't unusual for something to have both asthma, which is prevalent,
and gastrosophageal reflux disease, which is also prevalent.
That does not necessarily mean it is the gastrosophageal reflux that is causing this patient to have refractory asthma.
Okay.
So, I think the so-called established associations aren't so established.
I know there are plenty of ENT surgeons and respiratory physicians who, in a patient,
is not responding very well to standard treatment.
Would sort of empirically treat a patient for gastrosophageal reflux,
even though there's no convincing evidence of ear ejectively,
that it is the reflux that's causing their asthma or their laryngeitis.
Okay.
So, in 2018, there was a lion consensus, which called it's out the modern diagnosis of gastrosophageal reflux disease.
And what the lion consensus essentially says is that, you know, things like the history that we definitely rely on,
structured questionnaires.
There's a good questionnaire that people can fill out.
And even response to treatment is not sufficient for a conclusive diagnosis of gastrosophageal reflux disease.
Oh, no.
That's not particularly helpful for us in general.
You're a practice, isn't it?
Right.
But we have to accept it that the evidence is there,
that, you know, these things are plenty of people have these symptoms,
and they may even respond to a proton pump inhibitor,
but then when you go and you do investigations specifically to confirm whether a patient for false objective criteria for your reflux,
it's not there.
So, lion basically says it's an indication for further investigation.
Symptoms are basically an indication for further investigation to confirm
--- page 6 ---
whether the patient does indeed have acid reflux or some other diagnosis that may account for their symptoms.
But lion at the same time accepts this is not pragmatic for daily clinical practice.
So, I think what you can actually take from here is that, yes, in general practice,
we will still rely on a classical history to make a diagnosis of your reflux,
but we are aware that it's not adequately sensitive or specific for your reflux.
And especially if the patient has a suboptimal response,
they should probably have further investigation for treatment and also to be aware of any alarm symptoms,
such as this, or we'll come to the alarm symptoms soon, such as this major.
Okay.
So, how do we go about irrespective of the lion consensus that's almost trying to say to us,
you know, we can't really be completely reliant on the history to make a diagnosis of gases of your reflux.
So, they still accept a pragmatic trial.
In the absence of any alarm symptoms or concerning features in a young person with classical reflux,
most individuals will do an empiric trial of acid suppression,
and this uses a proton pump inhibitor, like lens operasol.
Symptoms usually respond to a PPI within 8 weeks.
So, generally about 8 to 12 weeks on review, the patient should have had a significant response.
What is crucial is to make sure the patient takes the proton pump inhibitor appropriately.
And a proton pump inhibitor should be taken 30 to 60 minutes before the first meal of the year and day.
Now, I don't know not everyone eats at the same time, but you're roughly speaking, you should take it before eating, right?
And not immediately before eating, at least half an hour to an hour before eating to switch off the proton, like the pumps,
before they become active.
Okay, this applies to, again, a patient with classic symptoms with no alarm features.
What are the alarm symptoms in a patient may present with symptoms of gases of your reflux?
I, as well, that will require further investigation.
If they have dysphagia, if they have unintentional, like weight loss, if they have any evidence of occult or vert, GI bleeding,
and inefficiency, anemia, et cetera, if they've had symptoms for more than five years, and if they are older than age 45,
those patients should be referred for investigation, and usually the upfront investigation one would do is an upper GI scope.
And the reason how come for these things such as symptoms more than five years and age more than five years,
is those are the patients, the older middle-aged patients who are at more risk for developing.
That pre-neoplastic lesion, I spoke about, the Barrett's esophagus, right?
That might put them at your risk in the future for developing esophageal adenoch carcinoma,
so they should be referred for further investigations.
In fact, all of these here.
Okay.
So, you now refer the patient to us for an upper GI scope,
and in our scope is by a gastroenterologist.
--- page 7 ---
And what are we searching for?
We are looking for evidence of mucosal injuries.
If there's a mucosal injury, now we have to see erosion.
A little bit of erotema and uradness at the low end of the esophagus is not endoscopic evidence of reflux.
I know some people who do scopes will say, oh, the lower esophagus looks a bit urad.
This is in keeping with reflux.
No, it isn't.
You have to see erosions, and we grade them as, oh, right in well.
So, if we do see erosions, great.
It's quite specific for your reflux.
Now we know this patient probably has your reflux, right?
But unfortunately, the presence of erosions is not very sensitive.
In other words, you can have quite significant gastrosophage of your reflux without any erosion.
So, the sensitivity is at best 60% for untreated gastrosophage reflux.
The other value of an upper scope is to identify the epic structures or the balance of esophagus, right?
As I spoke about earlier.
Further investigation, this is where the Leon cons answers also states like, you know,
if patient symptoms, they need further testing, which we know is not very practical or pragmatic, right?
Is to do esophageal pH studies, which are sort of regarded as the standard or the gold standard for confirming if a patient has a gastrosophage reflux.
So, don't get too concerned about how it's performed and all of that there.
Just to understand that it's a pH probe that's placed in the esophagus at the lower end,
and it collects pH readings over a 24 hour, like in a period.
And it can also help us to relate symptoms to reflux, because the patient goes around every time they have an event,
they press something on the counter and it records, they're having a reflux symptoms.
And then at the end of that hour, it's all put into a computer and we get a printout and we get your readings,
all done by the software, like in a program, and it gives us information.
And key in all that info is something called the acid exposure, like your time.
And if it's more than six percent, it's in keeping with gastrosophageal reflux.
If it's under four, it's not gastrosophageal reflux, it's not acid reflux.
And four and six is a bit of area that might need further investigations with impedance, monitoring, et cetera,
but don't concern yourself too much.
But just to be aware that ultimately, some patients will not respond,
or some patients have eight typical symptoms where you really need to prove
whether they've got reflux or patients being planned for an anti-reflux operation,
may need to have this thing called esophageal pH studies.
So, yeah, some of the clinical indications for pH studies, I'm not going to go over all of them.
But as I did mention right here, the indications are expanding where we really want to know what the phenotype is
--- page 8 ---
of a patient who's got these so-called reflux symptoms.
But it is a resource that is not widely available.
You do need some equipment, and you do need people who are trained to perform this, right?
In other places in the world, it's not performed by the physician usually.
It's usually performed by a laboratory technician who works in the unit.
In the department, and then they just perform the test.
They even go over it, and they read it, and then they just show it to the physician who says,
okay, it's in keeping with gastrointestinal reflux with this patient,
in view of their symptoms, and the things I saw at scope,
I think we need to do further investigations or something else.
Okay, so yes, the indications for it are expanding, but there are limited resources and availability.
So-called radiological studies using water soluble contrast,
or which we use more often compared to the old-style area.
Are inexpensive. If you have a radiology facility, they can easily perform this study.
The patient just brings the contrast, and you shoot x-rays.
It does give you some information about the presence of an esophageal stricture,
or any autism.
And to me, we use it fairly so actively where a patient's got this age up time early.
But it isn't something that we ask for frequently in a patient with gastroesophageal ureflux.
And as I did make, as I have highlighted here, it's primarily used in the evaluation of this age up front.
And I do enjoy having it, especially in a patient with this age up prior to doing a scope,
because I want to know if the patient's got an associated and unusual think-as-dive curriculum.
So when I do the scope, I know that there is a thing because I should avoid entering it,
because then I can cause complication by entering the patient's chest cavity,
and a patient has a perfect relation, and it's a serious complication.
So again, I'm one of those few people I think who says,
yes, I prefer to have it primarily in the evaluation of this age up,
but in straightforward, uncomplicated, your reflexive patients referred for a scope,
it isn't something we usually order anymore.
A esophageal anomaly, just to be aware of it, it tells you about the esophageal contraction
and the lower esophageal sphincter.
Okay, and it helps to obviously exclude eclasia, which can also sometimes present
in a very similar way in terms of symptoms to your reflux patients.
Oh, I feel acid coming up to my chest and into my throat and all of that there.
And that can sometimes get confused with your reflux.
And of course, it's useful in the pre-operative evaluation,
the patient who is being proposed for anterior reflux surgery,
--- page 9 ---
to assess what the contactability is of the esophagus itself,
and the contactability of the lower esophageal sphincter.
But I don't need to know too much of it, just to be aware of it,
and that it's used to assess esophageal modality,
and it's very useful in certain modality disorders to confirm them
and subgroup them, and classify them in conditions, for example,
a classical modality disorder that you should be aware of called eclasia,
with its failure of lower esophageal relaxation.
So what are the differentials for patients who guess esophageal reflux?
I think we've spoken about them, and they can be quite...
Period.
Of crucial importance is to make sure this patient is not having a cardiac problem,
coronary artery disease, which supersedes any esophageal reflux.
So you can, like I mentioned earlier,
gatsus of your reflux disease is prevalent world, you're wide,
but so is angiopic tortoise, and myocardial in-like function.
So it's not unusual for somebody who's had reflux for years to say,
oh, I think it's my reflux that's acting up,
when in fact they may actually be having a myocardial in function.
So think ECG before scope.
Okay.
Complications of gatsus of reflux hemorrhage and perforation are exceedingly rare.
I don't think I've ever seen a significant hemorrhage and perforation just from gasosophageal reflux,
especially these days where there's easier access early on for patients to be on antacids.
But we do see erosions in severe case.
You might get quite severe erosions, but those patients usually might have a bit of
iron deficiency rather than having any of earth hemorrhage.
What we do still see though is strictures from the acid itself.
So hectic esophageal strictures, these are benign strictures.
And of course, what's increasing, especially with the aging population,
is the pneoplastic change to the esophagus that we refer to as erosophagus,
that is your risk for the development of adenocarcinoma.
Okay.
So just briefly about a esophagus that I spoke about earlier.
So it is suspected at scope.
All I can say is this looks like an esophagus.
It must be confirmed with biopsy and his pathology.
--- page 10 ---
And what it is is where the normal squamous epithelium has now changed to a more
columnar type epithelium in response to long-standing acid reflux.
And this process here we refer to as interstinal metoplasia, right?
A change in the surface in the epithelium.
Now that can then go on to become abnormal cells.
This emplasia, right?
So this starting and you can get high-grade dysplasia and low-grade dysplasia,
according to the pathologist, about how the confirmation of the cell nucleus is starting
to change where it's becoming closer to a type of carcinoma.
Eventually, areas of dysplasia, if ignored, can go on to develop into an adenocarcinenoma.
So this is a pre-neoplastic phase.
And once the patient develops dysplasia, especially if it's high-grade, if we plate
that mucosa, if we remove it, excize it or heat it or, and it will, hey, which we do,
then we can prevent this individual who are now went from this normal squamous epithelium
to a columnar type epithelium to dysplasia.
We can prevent them from going on to developing an adenocarcinoma, which is what we are trying
to do, of course, right?
Because it wants to develop an adenocarcinoma that involves surgery and chemo and mobility
and mortality and expense, right?
Mobility, mortality and expense.
So if we can do, uh, uh, intervene here, we can prevent these patients from going on
to developing a carcinoma.
So here's what happened.
This is a consequence of gases of your deflux.
This is actually a short segment.
So here you can see the normal salmon pink type of, uh, very light salmon pink of the
squamous epithelium of the, uh, of the, uh, of the, uh, of the, uh, of the, uh, of the, uh,
of the, uh, of the, uh, of the, uh, of th