--- page 11 ---
e, uh, of the, uh, of the stomach.
Here's the stomach, just beyond there, this is the OG function.
You can see where the normal squamous epithelium has undergone some kind of, like, change
where it's starting to resemble the epithelium of the stomach.
And this is the Barrett's esophagus segment.
This is actually a very short, uh, segment and really of not too much concern.
But sometimes this, these segments can extend all the way quite high up the, uh, esophagus.
Okay.
Okay.
So that's briefly about an added esophagus.
Um, how do we treat reflux?
Well, firstly, we, there is non-prescription treatment that we should always, uh, use in over
and up, whether we're going to start the patient on the proton pump inhibitor or you're not up
front.
Uh, and the ones that we have evidence for include elevation of the head of the, like, you know,
uh, elevation of the head of the bed when the patient is sleeping, especially if they
have reflux at your night, so-called nocturnal reflux.
And most importantly, if a patient is overweight, doesn't have to be super easy or anything like
that, even if a patient is overweight and they have, uh, reflux, gastrointestinal reflux
disease, if they are able through a healthy eating program and exercise, lose even a little
bit of, uh, uh, you lose about 5% of their, uh, uh, their, like, in weight, it will have
a significant impact on their reflux, uh, symptoms.
Right.
So those are the two things we have evidence for that's quite clear.
Elevation of the head of the bed and weight loss.
Right.
So if you have a patient, oh, wait, please try and encourage them to lose, like, lose a
bit of, a little bit of, like, in weight, not, isn't it only going to help them with their
hypertension and, uh, diabetes and cardiovascular risk, uh, like, in factors, it's also going
to help them with their reflux, uh, symptoms, which is usually the thing that they complain
about.
Okay.
Uh, other, uh, like, factors which you can look at, but again, we don't have that much
evidence, uh, for it is if they can reduce their alcohol intake and, of course, smoking
cessation.
I'm talking specifically about your reflux.
Obviously, it's helpful to stop smoking for other reasons, but in terms of your reflux,
--- page 12 ---
it may be helpful.
We don't have conferencing evidence or, uh, for it, but either way, it seems to be a,
uh, great idea, too, in, are it smoking cessation for a variety of reasons, not just for gas
or software, your reflux.
Avoid, at times, bags, uh, changes in the diet, reduce their meal size, and the patient themselves
may know that there's certain foods that they eat that may precipitate episodes, so maybe
they can find substitutes or try and, uh, uh, oil them completely.
And, of course, most patients may have already tried a variety of over-the-counter treatments
and medications, such as alginates and H2, which, uh, agonists, which, um, uh, which we do
allow in, I mean, if a patient just has the occasional, you know, episode of guests of
your reflux, um, then these, um, medications might be fairly helpful.
And sometimes we do indeed encourage them as an add-on treatment to standard proton
pumping inhibitors.
So this is some of the, so you can't prescribe these things, even though they are available
over-the-counter, as, uh, like, well, for example, your alginates, I have a scon, which isn't
a result, and it's an on-demand treatment.
So unlike your proton pumping inhibitors, where I mentioned earlier, you need to take it
half-notch and half, uh, half-notch and half-before eating, this you can have immediately.
So if you eat something and you feel, oh, I think I'm gonna have reflux because we're
at a big stake and, uh, ribs and all of that there, um, you can have this immediately,
or if you start to feel any, uh, uh, heartburn, you can use this on, like, a demand.
H2 receptor and segments have old drugs from the 1970s and 80s that we've used quite
frequently before proton inhibitors.
Compared to PPI's, they actually do have a, you're rapid onset of action and are still
used for patients who have, uh, egg through episodes, especially in the evenings.
So as an on-demand kind of, uh, treatment.
In certain cases, we do resort to using prokinetic drugs to improve the emptying of the
stomach, especially in those, you know, uh, uh, poor stomach emptying from the kick.
And so, um, but, um, in reality, it's the most frequently drug, uh, the most frequent
and drug use for a number of years now for gastrointestinal reflux has been the proton
pump inhibitors.
Uh, they are fairly safe.
They are probably overscribed.
They have been issues with safety concerns in the, uh, with the long term use of these
agents.
Um, but by and large, they have been proven to be, uh, fairly safe, but they still need
to be used appropriately, simply because there have been some concerns over long term safety
--- page 13 ---
issues.
So appropriate use of proton pump inhibitors must be emphasized.
What do they do?
They markedly reduce acid secretion within the stomach.
And some examples are given their metrosol and zochrosol, et cetera.
And again, I'm emphasizing it must be taken about half an hour to an hour before, um,
breakfast.
In certain instances, you may have to consider surgical like a treatment.
Now, surgery actually does correct the underlying pathophysiology of gastrosol,
reflux.
Remember all these agents we spoke about are merely removing the stimulus, which is the
acid, right?
Or they're protecting the esophagus or the switching off the acid.
They're not really altering the physiology.
Surgery actually will alter the physiology because it is aimed at the lower esophageal
sphincter to stop those, uh, frequent transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations
and to augment the lower esophageal sphincter.
Of course, it does come with its own side here.
If you make the rat too firm, too tight, the patient may complain on this, uh, like
a phagia and some patients may consist of excessive bloating and air in the stomach
because they cannot adequately release the air, uh, and they eat.
So it's in cell, it's in the individuals for gastroesophageal reflux.
These have to be carefully selected out.
Okay.
Um, so that's basically what surgery will, the surgeon will do.
They'll reduce the hernia that if it's there, bring it down.
Synchronal, it'll sort of that decentralization of the lower esophageal
sphincter and the diphenic truss and reinforce the lower esophageal sphincter.
Okay.
And that's basically what's done.
This is a 360 degree fund application.
The funders of the stomach care is moved and freed and mobilized and wrapped around
the lower esophageal sphincter below the, like a diaphragm.
And that augments the lower esophageal sphincter there.
Okay.
So who is anti-reflux surgery, a reasonable option in, uh, healthy patients with
God, well-controlled on PPIs, who want to alternative therapy because the drug
--- page 14 ---
expands poor medication compliance or fear of underlying side effects.
Patients with volume regurgitation, aspiration, uncutored on PPIs.
But like I said, these are highly selected individuals.
Other treatments that have emerged on the, like, you know, market recently is the
potassium competitive acid of locus or pea caps.
These provide potent acid suppression, flexible, uh, see, unlike protein
pump inhibitors, you don't have to have them half an hour before meals.
They're a bit more flexible.
And unfortunately, they're not very, uh, ideal, uh, uh, available as yet.
But, um, I suspect that these drugs will be used more and more in years to, uh, come,
especially in those who, uh, are still experiencing significant symptoms while
on a proton, uh, pump inhibitor.
And then, uh, of more recent interest is now, uh, rather than an operation and
surgery, there's some endoscopic, uh, treatments that are directed at the lowest
of Gerald's winter.
But I don't think you need to be too concerned about those just to be aware
that now the physician with the scope is also trying to, you know, replicate what
the surgeon is doing at, uh, you know, operation.
Okay.
So I'm going to leave, uh, reflux, uh, disease now, and we're going to go on to
the other acid disorder that's frequently mounted, which is peptic ulcer disease.
So maybe now going into the stomach.
And what is a ulcer, peptic ulcer?
If you go over this term, ulcer is in my stomach, ulcer is in my stomach, right?
Uh, how do we define it?
A ulcer, a peptic ulcer disease is denudation of the mucosa that is, that was exposed to
the gastric acid.
It must extend into the musculitis propia, your layer.
If it's not extending to the right to the, it's got some, yeah, then we call that an erosion.
It's not really an ulcer, it's an erosion.
It's very superficial.
But for it to be an ulcer, it has to extend into the MP, uh, light.
Uh, lagging layer.
Uh, it occurs commonly in the gastric anthem and, uh, judinum, all.
But what, I'll tell you, generally low with uncomplicated empty gases, but if, if there
is any mortality is due to these three key complications, hemorrhage, perforation, and
obstruction.
--- page 15 ---
Okay.
Uh, the hemorrhage and obstruction, we can generally do something about that endoscopically.
We don't need to always resort immediately to an operation.
Um, in fact, especially for your hemorrhage, for an apogee, I bleed from a ulcer, I can't
recall.
It's been years since we actually, um, sent a bleeding ulcer that we could not control
with other means, especially endoscopic means to the surgeon.
Uh, we were able to control almost all of them, even on a repeat scope, uh, endoscopically.
Uh, endoscopically and with, uh, proton, um, inhibitors.
Of course, if the patient has a perforation that needs, there's not too much we can do
there as physicians, gastros that needs to go to the operating room.
Obstruction.
Sometimes we can do bloom and dilatation.
And this is the kind of patient that we'll sort of, we'll have to have a conversation at
some point with the surgeon about in terms of a long term solution.
But, uh, depending on the state of the patient, uh, we can sometimes do endoscopic
blooming of them to try and open it up.
Uh, but a surgical solution is generally more of us in the long term.
Uh, okay.
So that's the age elderly.
We see more increased insane use, uh, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
This is important.
So the most common causes of peptic acid disease that you need to know, uh, helicobacter
pyrenolary associated peptic acid disease and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug associated
peptic acid disease.
These two by far account for most of the ulcers that you'll see worldwide.
Okay.
There are other causes of ulcers that's worthwhile to be aware of so-called stress ulcers.
We're not talking about stress from exams.
We're talking about stress from physiology.
So somebody with severe pancreatia, your trauma, acute pancreatitis, extensive burns.
That's your ICU type of patient who can develop ulcerations in the GI tract just from the
physiological stress.
Other things that can cause ulcers even in the upper GI tract are clones disease.
You can get instant tuberculosis.
You can get gastrodinol tuberculosis that can appear similar to an ulcer.
And vascular insufficiency.
--- page 16 ---
And let's not take it as well.
Uh, stomach like in a cancer can present as an ulcer or can appear and just copy it as an ulcer
and can have similar symptoms to an ulcer as well.
Okay.
Gastric cancer.
Uh, so what is the pathophysiology?
Again, it's an imbalance of factors that are protective of the gastric mucosa.
This is in providing part bile, prostaglandins, and a mucus, ulayer, and harmful factors.
One of the harmful factors, H. pylori, pepsin, that's enzymes, insase, biracids, et cetera, and acid.
So, I'll go back to Pylori.
Here, I'm going to speak a little bit about H. pylori.
And this is Robin Waterman battery.
Marshall in 2005.
And they are a pair of Australians.
And it's a special interest to the GI community, to physicians who are astroenterologists because Robin knew.
Uh, I'm sorry.
Addy, like, Marshall is a astroenterologist.
And the reason why him and his friend there, the pathologist, Robin,
I don't want the, uh, like, prize, the Nobel Prize in 2005, was for showing that link between a organism, bacteria, that lived in the stomach,
and peptic ulcer disease.
So, it so turned out that an important cause of peptic ulcer disease was a bacteria.
Right, this was unheard of.
It was, uh, I was surgeons at the time where, like, no, this can't be real.
It's not true at all.
But the theory showed that if you eradicate the helicobacter pylori, the ulcer will not recur.
What was the problem before that?
The problem before that was you give patients lots of different types of antacids and concoctions,
and the ulcers will hear for a bit, and then they'll recur.
And this often affected young, like, in the men.
And what ultimately happened was most of these patients ended up being wheeled off to the operating room to have half this stomachs you removed.
Right?
And so, also, your operations in the 80s and the 1970s were huge.
Every surgeon knew how to do a variety of different types of ulcer operations,
agotomies, agasparing, et cetera, et cetera.
And because of this, um, this, I'll be in a way,
it now really meant that hardly anyone should go to the operating theater for a peptic ulcer.
Okay.
--- page 17 ---
If you eradicate the helicobacter and you treat the ulcer, it won't recur.
So, helicobacter isn't just associated with epic ulcer disease.
It's also a risk factor for gastric adenocastinoma and lymphoma of the stomach.
It's a gram negative facility.
It lives in the mucus layer of the overlying gastric epithelium.
It scums around there and causes inflammation.
We think duodenum, it also causes duodenum ulcers by infection of ectopic gastric mucosa.
So, how does this bacteria live in this hostile acidic environment?
By creating an alkaline environment around it, and it has an enzyme called urease,
which breaks down urea in stomach to ammonia and then utilizes the acid.
But we can use that urea's action that the bacteria has to look for helicobacter pylori.
So, there's something called urea, et cetera.
But it's not unfortunate, although it's not invasive.
It's not something that is readily available.
Anyway, it's South Africa and so far as I'm aware.
Serology is not particularly helpful unless you need some kind of epidemiology, like in research.
Stool antigen is helpful.
make a quite a sensitive and specific diagnosis and mostly if someone said
also it was confirmed as scope rather than doing a repeat endoscopic
examination if the patient has now received treatment for age pylpylori
eight weeks after completion of treatment you can rather do a stool
antigen to confirm that the organism is eradicated so stool antigen is
definitely clinically useful and probably underutilized okay there are
other tests you can do you can if you happen to scope patient and you see a
lot of inflammation or they got this epsilon or indeed if you do see an
ulcer as like well the person performing the scope the gastroenterologist can
take a biopsy of the mucosa of the stomach and place it into a little
solution that will show you a change in the pH which indicates that there is
urease activity in that biopsy specimen and from that we infer that that urease
activity that's causing a pH like change is coming from an organism and that
organism is obviously heliobacter pylori histology one can also search for the
organism under but you need to take a few biopsy samples and send it to the
pathologist is a little bit expensive you can do a culture but this is quite
but it isn't the easiest organisms to grow to check the culture and sensitivity
it can be performed but here you need to speak to your lab microbiologist so from
a clinical point of view the three that we most frequently use that are
clinically useful and used are the stool antigen urease activity of a biopsy
--- page 18 ---
specimen and his his ology and here's what the organism appears like okay
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the other important cause of peptic
also disease how do they do this they can ever by the non-steroidal
self are directly like toxic due to the acidic your nature but actually it's
primarily by inhibition of the cyclo oxygenase or on the enzyme which leads
to suppression of prostaglandins synthesis which we know which we know
will then lead to decreased mucous production by carbon dissipation mucosal
perfusion and epithelial proliferation and all of these things that are to
spoke about are the protective factors to your epithelium of your stomach so
how do they clinically present history again can be a bit unreliable there's
no abdominal pain indeed in about 40% of patients with peptic ulcerated disease
the classic symptoms that patients may have are episodes of burning or
dalepigastric pain it may improve with antacids or food they may occur at the
at your night intermittent and sometimes associated with nausea and vomiting
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use are more likely to be without pain
painless because using anti-inflammatory agents they may present with an upper
GI bleed as their first presentation hematemesis with with with the
venous stools and most frequently it's the anterum of the stomach that's in
no fault. Clinical examination often not very helpful in patient may have
epigastric glycotendenous and if they have a perforation obviously then they
get signs of petitinitis or even a fist of formation and that's the one
instance where generally the patient needs to probably go fairly urgently to
the surgeon but also that bleed you can have chronic occult bleeding they can
just present with an iron deficiency anemia hematemesis liena is an overt
bleed and that patient obviously needs to be resuscitated et cetera and
stabilized and obviously have an endoscopic examination to confirm the
etiology and depending on the ulcer to provide endoscopic treatment so in
terms of the diagnostic evaluation this is just a rough overview and yeah there's
not much of a role for anarium study very very limited role maybe if
someone's got a degree of outward obstruction and you want to see how
long this strictures if you can't get through with your scope but other than
that this is just the overview okay upper GI and ask a P for sure if you're
concerned about always we always concerned about if they if these
symptoms are associated with a cancer whether it's not just a benign
peptic ulcer whether it's actually a ulcer that is your cancerous a malignant
ulcer okay so obviously the patient has or eight loss if you can feel an epigastric
mass of omitting anemia family history of stomach cancer okay and as a rule biopsy
--- page 19 ---
for the person doing the scope we generally have a rule biopsy or ulcers
in the stomach you know ulcers generally those are not malignant they are usually
benign but if it's an ulcer in the stomach you should take care of a biopsy to rule
out here it can say if you can't do it at the same time with the scope because
patients actively hemorrhaging or unstable or bleeding then you will have to
return when the patient is stabilized to either see that this ulcers completely
heal or to do a or if it isn't then certainly you have to go in and take a
biopsy to make sure it's not a cancer and here's an example of ulcers here's a
very deep ulcer and there's a spurting artery so this is a forest rule
on a ulcer this is an arterial spurting ulcer and this needs endoscopic treatment usually we'll use
a solution of saline and adrenaline but then that isn't enough you will have to put a hemoclip
or a heater probe over this to close off that artery that's spurting there
this is also a high risk ulcer it's got a fibrin case but what you can see here is a little raised
area and this all of these individuals all these slides i'm showing you now images i'm
showing you now are all patients who presented with an upper GI bleed a significant upper GI
bleed but these two are high-risk lesions and this is what we call a visible blood
eso and the reason why it's a high-risk lesion this and this is because of the risk for re-bleeding
okay so even so this i will need to put a hemoclip on or put a heater probe over this
as well to close off that blood vessel because it's a high risk that this patient can
you get re-bleed this is an adherent blood clot probably not as high this it's usually
recommended that we remove this blood clot and see if there is a visible blood eso that requires
endoscopic treatment but depending on the patient and the underlying ulcer to coordinate and this
is the kind of ulcer that we even though like i told you all these individuals presented with
an upper GI bleed this is actually a fibrin-based forest tree ulcer so to speak
there is no visible blood vessel there's no oozing there's no concerning features here
this patient does not need any endoscopic treatment you look for you to go back to polari
you treat it tell them to stop smoking tell them to avoid NSAIDs and start them on a high-dose
proton pump inhibitor and we eradicate HP okay so this is the overall treatment of the
company patients emergency management of bleeding perforation obstruction that's quite clear
those things are urgent but then for those that aren't so urgent remember proton
pump inhibitors we only use IV proton pump inhibitors if the patients having an upper GI
bleed in the first 24 hours and then we might continue the infusion 72 hours depending on the
type of lesion we see at scope so there's no place for long-term IV PPI's for everyone
it's just for the patient who has is having an upper GI bleed from a peptic ulcer
and the standard of treatment has been auto PPI's
here you go back to PPI how do you how to treat so it changes it's an organism that is very
difficult to eradicate you need at least two antibiotics plus protein pump inhibitor and usually
--- page 20 ---
treatment is required for two weeks so it's quite hard I mean to take two antibiotics four or two
weeks plus the proton pump inhibitor and even with you like the your regimen I have
below there's an example sometimes in about 15% to up to 8% you fail to eradicate the organism and
then in certain instances there are second line and third line your regimens that can be you know
tried or used and recommended but once the organism has been eradicated you do your stool
antigen test about eight weeks after completion of a course of your a eradication diet and treatment
the insurance rate is really low okay so who do we treat almost everyone some would recommend
we should go and screen people for you to go back to PPI already and actively treat those that is
something to consider especially because of its association with stomach cancer
gastric cancer but certainly it's strongly recommended in patients with duodenal or
eugastric ulcer lymphoma atrophic gastritis patients who have had a recent resection of
gastric cancer so remind the surgeons or the onologist yes you've treated the cancer but
remember to eradicate the helicobacter pylori so it won't recur and any first degree relative
of a patient with you know gastric cancer but as I did mention there is a worldwide consideration
that we should actually consider to consider seeking screening and treating everyone with helicobacter
only but I don't think we just there as yet okay yes so as I did alluded to earlier there is a
potential road to seek and treat all adults with helicobacter pylori as public health strategy to
reduce the population risk of pedicarsities and you know gastric cancer so further reading
is in terms of the upper GI tract is advised on echolatia and other esophageal mortality disorders
that all of esophageal palatation for strictures benign strictures I'm not referring to
lignin strictures and lignin strictures you can do a gentle esophageal irritation then but more
often you're not if they're not forced if they for alliation not good surgical like in a candidates
we are happy to put down a stand for their for long-term pyloriation of their malignant esophageal
stricture here in this instance I'm referring to esophageal dilatation for benign peptic
strictures scalar derma because of associational esophageal dismutality and because you have
increased this for reflux because you get inadequate esophageal clearance and the rare
but interesting is alling the elicin syndrome which is associated with the excessive amounts
of acid secretion and it's a neuro endocrine tumor that is just releasing in
consciously with no control of like a gastron so that's hypogastin and emia and that hormone is
responsible for acid production with no inhibition uninhibited secretion of
lignin gastron from a neuro endocrine tumor and it causes ulcers in unusual places poorly
healing ulcers extensive erosions etc so it's rare but it's interesting and that's where I'm going
to stop and thank you for your attention
