--- page 1 ---
Okay, so for the first lecture, we're going to be speaking about, you know, jaundice,
which is a key sign in clinical like medicine.
And you'll often be confronted by like patients arriving either in your casualty or in your
rooms with this key sign.
So this lecture is basically to give you a framework in terms of how to approach the
clinical problem of your jaundice, right?
So it's a hard sign and it's abnormal.
So in terms of a framework, an easy approach is to start off with a gross antonical approach.
This is an overview of the like liver itself.
Then here you've got the intra hepatic, like bile ducts and those join and coalesce to
form the common hepatic ear duct.
And then you get the cystic duct that joins in there and below that is the common, I
can bile duct.
In the common bile duct, the lower one third runs through the head of the pancreas.
And then obviously that exits via the apolophore water into the second part of the duodenum.
Now all this is a gross anatomical approach to give you a framework to try and figure
out where is the problem arising from that's giving rise to the sign of your jaundice.
So is it a structural problem, for example, anywhere within the CBD, a stone in the CBD,
a tumor in the head of the, like, in a pancreas causing blurry compression?
And that we will refer to as extra hepatic, you know, colis stasis.
Or is it a problem with the intra hepatic, blurry tree, such as this glrosing colangiopathy?
Or is it a problem within the liver itself?
For example, a big, classically example over there would be an acute vital hepatitis or
a patient with decompensated cirrhosis where the entire organ has become scarred, right?
So this just gives you a little bit of a framework from a gross anatomical perspective.
Shifting on then, if we go in a bit further, we can also see that you can get, like, jaundice
from increased hemolysis, right?
So if you've got any cause of increased intra vascular hemolysis, you're going to get an
--- page 2 ---
elevation in your unconjugated bilirubin.
And that usually gives you very mild, like a jaundice.
And other example where we get increased hemolysis is in an infection, like, you know,
leptospirosis or, like, in malaria, being a classic example, right?
But now, once you've got unconjugated bilirubin that forms from the natural breakdown of your
red cells, that needs to be transported from the vessels, from the blood, into the
liver cell itself, the herbicide.
So if you have a problem with your transport, that is encoded for via transporter, like,
proteins, then you can have an abnormal increase in your unconjugated bilirubin.
And a castable example of this that you'll see in fairly normal individuals that's not
really of too much concern is in a condition such as the jailbears syndrome, right?
So in jailbears, there's a problem with the transport of this unconjugated bilirubin from
the blood into the hepatocyte.
So once the unconjugated bilirubin enters the herbicide itself, it is then processed and
you don't need to concern yourself too much with how it goes about being, like, you know,
processed within the hepatocyte itself.
But just to know that it becomes, it gets converted from insoluble, unconjugated bilirubin
to soluble, conjugated bilirubin, right?
So that's why on your LFTs, sometimes you can ask for the bilirubin to refraction, you
can make it into unconjugated and conjugated.
And that gives you some kind of idea whether it's predominantly unconjugated or conjugated
hyperbirubinemia, which then helps you with the etiology.
Remember, at all points, we are trying to figure out where is the, like, you know, problem
and what is the problem that's giving rise to the clinical sign of, you know, jaundice,
right?
So as I mentioned earlier, this is a framework, right?
So now we've got the conjugated bilirubin within the hepatocyte itself and it cannot
stay in the hepatocyte because it is, you're toxic to the hepatocyte itself.
--- page 3 ---
It needs to be transported out of the liver's cell.
And again, you need transporter new proteins, which will come to soon that needs that are
required to transfer the conjugated bilirubin from the liver's cell into the bilirubin system.
Right?
And then once it's into the bilirubin system, as you've seen earlier, the conjugated bilirubin
ends up in the small intestine and it undergoes, it reacts with bacterial proteases, urobalinogen.
There's some intra hepatic re-circulation from the urobalinogen, which undergoes, which
something is reabsorbed by the autobane and returns to the, the way itself, so-called
intra-phatic circulation.
But most of it ends up in the stool.
And of course, this conjugated bilirubin has some role in fat digestion and absorption.
But from our starting off point, in other words, having an approach to the clinical problem
of, you know, jaundice, we are now trying to actually figure out where is the problem.
Right?
So is it here?
Is the increase in hemolysis?
Is it a problem in the transport?
Is it a problem with the cell itself, the hepatocyte itself?
Maybe there is insufficient hepatocytes because they have been completely destroyed either
by a serotic process, which is a chronic process that eventually leads to cirrhosis from whichever
etiology.
Or is it from a severe acute hepatitis of any etiology, for example, vital alcohol, et cetera.
Right?
Or is it a problem with the transportation of this conjugated bilirubin into the bilirubin
system where it cannot be excreted?
So that's at a cellular year level.
Or is it a transporting problem within the bilirubin system itself, a tumor like corangiocastinoma,
for example, or a stone in the extrapatic alex that's causing obstruction to the bilirubin
--- page 4 ---
system?
Is it a fertilizer that has extrapatic cory stasis?
Or is it intrapatic cory stasis where there's a problem within the intrapatic bilirubin system
itself?
Okay.
So again, we're just giving this broad framework of thinking about a patient with your jaundice
and where and would be the problem and what.
So we're going in a bit further.
We spoke about the transport of the bilirubin from the atrocyte into the bilirubin system.
And for this transporter, it requires transporter proteins.
And some of the examples, and you don't need to recall the names of these.
These include things like MRP2, MDR3, and BSEP, the pylsalt-exporter protein.
So if you have abnormal transporter proteins, which are genetically encoded for, you may
have a problem with the transportation of the conjugated bilirubin from the atrocyte
into the, like, the bilirubin.
Okay.
So people do have genetically abnormal transporter proteins, and these are variable.
It also explains why in certain instances, some people are exposed to certain substances
like antichuberculous treatment or other drugs, certain types of antibiotics, and any, to
be honest, it can be any, like in medication, can have a problem of your jaundice because
that may affect a transporter protein, which is insufficient or abnormal.
So the exposure to the agent, the, again, this case, may then subsequently lead to jaundice
because it affects some or one or two of these transporter proteins that may not be
quite normal.
Okay.
It's also associated with other inherited etiologies of Oli's stasis, such as your progressive
familiar intrapatic, Oli's aces, which are interesting genetic abnormalities in these
exporter-like proteins that are responsible for the transport of the conjugated bilirubin
--- page 5 ---
from the atrocyte into the, like, in bile duct.
Okay.
So if there's anything you're going to recall from this entire year lecture, it will probably
be the slide that you are seeing, like, now, this really gives you a very simple framework
to approach the clinical problem of your jaundice, right?
And there's various other, like, names of the yellow sclera, ik, thiros, or your jaundice,
they all basically mean the same.
And as I said, the framework here is very straightforward.
Is it pre-hipatic, in other words, hemolysis, increased breakdown of your red cells?
Is it hepatic, a problem within the way itself, the area of extinction of bile, from the peptocytes,
and in an example over there, there are other examples, of course, an example there that
I gave is a patient with decompensated cirrhosis, or is it cholistatic, which refers to a failure
of the formation of bile or bile transport from the peptocytes, so think of it from
a cellular, like, in a level, all the way down to the impeller of a fatter, which empties
into the small bar.
And this can either be, so when it comes to the cholistatic jaundice, it can either
be intrapatic, or extra hepatic, and when I refer to extra hepatic, I'm basically talking
about the tubes and the pipes, right, the common bile, the hepatic duct, et cetera, right,
and that we consider to be a plumbing, basically, is there a problem with the larger tubes?
And pipes, okay.
So, again, when a patient presents, or is found on clinical examination to have, like,
a jaundice, there's a few key things you need to ask on history.
History needs to be quite extensive due to the duration of the jaundice, as the patient
of previous episodes of jaundice that may point to certain etiologies, like viral, which was
acute at some stage, and then it got dissolved and is now flared up.
It became chronic, could it be autoimmune related, where these patients can have episodes
of flares in between episodes that are quite, you know, normal, or something like geobias,
which has to do with the transporter proteins of the unconjugateably-robin into the way
--- page 6 ---
itself.
Ask about flu-like symptoms, unintentional weight loss.
We always concern, especially in older individuals, about the development of a unit cancer, such
as colangiocastinoma, or a tumor in the head of the ligand pancreas, or chronic pancreas.
Liganditis can also cause blurry obstruction.
And those patients often, and those conditions are often associated with unintentional, like
in weight loss.
As the patient gives you a history of fever, ligos, and you write up a quadrant, like pain,
that those are key features of ascending cholen, eonogitis.
And those patients, if they have, you know, jaundice, if they have your ribose, right
of a chronic pain, with your jaundice, need your rapid imaging, blood cultures, et cetera,
and urgent referral to a gastroenterologist for an endoscopic retrograde colangiopanketography
to decompress what is most probably unobstructed, early system, which is now coming in, you
are infected.
Obviously, in anyone with the jaundice, ask about alcohol.
But along with alcohol, remember to ask about drugs.
And when we refer to these types of things, we refer to everything, right?
Everything.
So, you know, there's a lot of people, supplements over the counter, something they may have
picked up from the neighbor's house, et cetera.
So, it includes everything that the patient may not consider to be a pharmaceutical agent,
but may also be associated with a drug-induced liver injury.
Any history of surgeries, sometimes a surgeon may, they may have been some operation that
was recently performed, a removal of their choruses, like, you know, taking me to move
up the gallbladder, and the patient may have inadvertently had some kind of eartrogenic
injury to the CBD.
Ask about a travel history for, especially to areas with malaria, history of blood transfusions,
even though our blood is screened for hepatitis B and C, it's actually something we still
--- page 7 ---
ask about.
And of course, pregnancy, family history, we mentioned some of the familial intrapatic
causes of choruses, okay.
And other on history, you want to know if there's predominantly choruses, especially
something with jaundice, is a chorusatic, and that's associated with the urine that's
in dark, pale stools, itchiness, proritis, is the history of any hemat-emesis lina?
Now, a word about lina, lina, patient may say, they must lose a very dark and black in
all of it, but strictly speaking, you need to do a urectal examination to confirm that
because lina is a clinical sign rather than a symptom, so you may be alluded to in the
history, but you need to confirm that on clinical examination.
Changes in skin tone, also associated with cirrhosis, coordination problems, disturbance
in sleep weight, like in patterns, that's early features of hepatic n-carephar, eulopathy.
Okay, so those are some of the aspects you asked on history.
A little bit of a disclaimer, I won't be speaking about these, but it's definitely
worth being a payoff.
We won't be talking too much at all about like in jaundice in pregnancy.
So in patients who are pregnant, there's the usual causes of like in jaundice, they can
get viral hepatitis, which is probably quite frequent, as a cause of jaundice in pregnancy,
they can get stones in the CBD causing glivy obstruction, et cetera, so the usual causes
that you see in the non-pregnant individual, plus there's some unique causes of jaundice
in pregnancy, and an example of there would be acute fatty liver of pregnancy just for
you to be aware of, and that can be quite a serious condition that requires specialist
care and cooperation between the physician and the obstetrician.
We won't be speaking about neonatal, like jaundice, and jaundice in, like in childhood,
I'll leave that to the pediatric unit department.
Okay, but there are certain causes of this infected affair, your number of causes of
like jaundice in like in kids that over your lap with adults, example of viral hepatitis
and auto immune, et cetera, and obviously some of these kids do, these kids may grow up into
--- page 8 ---
it, like adulthood, but having been first seen in ediatrics, okay.
So on a clinical examination in a patient with your jaundice, if there must be meticulous
and thoughtful, the jaundice sometimes can be subtle and is easiest appreciated in neonatal
like you liked.
Usually it's fairly obvious, but on occasion it may be quite subtle.
Key to this is a good general examination, don't forget that, is the patient ails, whatever
in my molysis or an upper GI bleed, et cetera, the patient may have had in your past, is
there any lymph aden, you hear anopathy, a virtuous lymph, for example, in some of you
may have a tumour in the head of the pancreas, any signs of egg loss and any email of the
lower limbs to suggest this, the patient's got unlike cirrhosis, for example.
And of course we do also examine for the other clinical signs of cirrhosis and the clinical
signs of portal hyper intention to speak about in the electron cirrhosis.
Check the pulse, temperature, blood pressure, if you really want to do well for kinds of
flyshillings, although you appreciate that much easier on a slit, your lamp examination
and that's a very patterned mnemonic feature of Wilson's disease, which is a due to overload
of copper in the liver, look for scratch marks, bruising, is there any due to trans
contracture or any other signs of ethanol to produce.
So these are the signs of cirrhosis, right?
And I've just given you a like list over there and these are the things that you would
go and examine for in anyone who presents with your jaundice, for sure.
Gamic mastery, artistic stratigraphy, hair loss in the axilla, legs is associated with
cumming, leuconicia, spider, nivapam, retima.
But I've got two other quotes over there, one swallow does not make a say, some are meaning
that if you find one clinical sign of, for example, a spider like a spider, like a nivap.
In an individual who's got no risk factors for cirrhosis, who's got no other clinical
signs of cirrhosis, then you'd be hard pressed to say just because this patient's got a spider
like a nivis, therefore he must have cirrhosis.
Okay, so having one of these signs does not mean the patient obviously has cirrhosis.
--- page 9 ---
And then do not commit the sin of a diagon monastic greed.
What does this mean?
This means if a patient's got, for example, a potato's bee and a strong ethanol history
and presents with, like, you know, jaundice and they've got gynecoma, we've got a gynecoma,
like a mastia, they've got axillary, alopecia, they've got leucobiacinicia, but there's no
spider, nivapam, eta, etima, that does not mean the patient doesn't have cirrhosis.
Clearly they've got strong risk factors for cirrhosis.
They presented with your jaundice and they've got some very good clinical signs of cirrhosis.
Just because they do not have parma, eta, etima, and spider like sort of your nivi does
not exclude the fact that this patient, most probably, highly probably, amongst 100% sure,
will have cirrhosis high up on my list of differentials.
Okay.
Okay.
Now, just to differentiate now, those were signs of cirrhosis that we just spoke about.
These are the signs of portal hyper your tension.
This includes a caputament, dusi, sphenomegalae, and acites.
Now, although you may not be able to appreciate it on clinical exam, the Pharisees are also
a feature of portal hyper your tension that you'll have to do an inoscopic examination
for, but you may become alerted to the possible presence of Pharisees if the patient presents
or has a history of a GI bleed, a gastrointestinal bleed.
Okay.
Now, why do we separate out the signs of cirrhosis and portal hyper tension?
Okay.
So, you can have non-sclerotic causes of portal hyper your tension, right?
So, not all causes of portal hyper tension are due to cirrhosis, right?
There are non-sclerotic causes of portal hyper tension as, you know, well, having said
that worldwide, the most common cause of portal hyper your tension is cirrhosis, right?
So, usually if patient has cirrhosis, there often may be signs of portal hyper tension
--- page 10 ---
as, like and well, which you should also go out and seek, right?
But just be aware that not all portal hyper tension is due to cirrhosis, but yes, by and
large worldwide cirrhosis is the most common cause of portal hyper your tension, okay?
And then these are the signs of liver failure.
So, again, we've separated it out into signs of cirrhosis, signs of portal hyper tension,
and now we are onto the signs of liver failure.
And these can also be quite extensive in these various aiding systems for these that you can
always go back and refer to.
So, we can grade the degree of hepatic and careful apathy, but in early stages, you may
just have construction apaxia, cognitive impairment, and as they're in careful apathy
becomes more severe, and these patients who have decompensated cirrhosis are usually ill,
right?
They are not well, or they may have an asteriskus, which is a flapping tremor, and in the severe
instances, you're going to go into confusion, coma, and you may even have fetal apathycus,
which is a sickly sweet smell.
I think you have to smell it to kind of to appreciate it, because that's sort of like
a sweetish, sickly smell.
And in a patient who now presents with these clinical signs, you look for the possible
precipitants of hepatic failure, especially in some of you who is known to have cirrhosis.
Okay, so they may have an association, a bleed, they may have an infection, right?
So, infection, infection, infection is usually a very important precipitant of hepatic failure
in a non-scrotic.
Okay, let's go on from there.
So, just to again go a bit further now, we've done the history, we've done the examination,
and then of course, we do some testing.
So, in anybody with like jaundice, you're going to start up with a liver function, like
in test, the LFT, INR, the international normalized ratio, which is usually e