--- page 11 ---
levated in somebody
with cirrhosis but isn't always.
And that tells you about the liver, some big function, the INR along with the albumin
and the bleerubin.
The other results on the LFT, such as your alanine transaminase and your alkaline phosphatase,
doesn't really tell you that much about the liver function per se, but it tells you
about where the anality may be.
Is it from the polyesterum, or is it a cellular problem?
Is it hepatic or cholistatic, or is it like in a mixed, okay, so let's go on from there.
So other investigations, you're doing a patient who's jaundiced, includes a full blood count
with a smear, algae age, elected dehydrogenase level, and this is telling you whether the
patient has any hemolysis.
And when it comes to the, like in a liver, we are fairly spoiled for imaging, so you need
to use this prudently, and most things will start up with a very straightforward transabdominal
ultrasound, which can provide useful information.
And in certain instances, then, certain instances, not only sometimes, just with the transabdominal
ultrasound alone, you have adequate information to make a diagnosis, and indeed, sometimes
to even, you know, act on it, okay?
This, you may then need to go on to the CT scan in certain instances.
You may need to do an ultrasound in certain instances, and endoscopic ultrasound in certain
instances, or a magnetic resonance, collanger, pancreatogram in certain instances.
ERCP, which is an endoscopic procedure that images the intra and extra-patic bollily system,
is generally undertaken with therapeutic intent.
In other words, I need to put a stent in to relieve the blurry obstruction, or I need
to extract a stone or do a balloon dalette patient.
It's not usually performed just, in fact, it's hardly ever easily performed, just to make
--- page 12 ---
a diagnosis.
In other words, you should already know from your other imaging and your labs and your
history and your clinical examination, what the problem is, and the reason why we say
ERCP must be undertaken only with therapeutic intention is because it's a procedure that
does carry significant, your risk, acute pancreaticitis, injury to the bowel, if you do a
interrupting, you can cause hemorrhage shard.
So when I do an ERCP, I want to be quite sure I know why I am forming this procedure, maybe
it's to remove a stone that's causing ability obstruction, or to deploy a stent across
a stricture.
And then, of course, some patients after all of the evaluation may need a liver biopsy,
for example, where you suspecting a patient with autoimmune hepatitis, using those instances,
we will do a biopsy.
There is further add-ons to the sort of imaging.
We now, even with ultrasound and certain machines, can assess the stiffness of the organ itself,
so particularly useful in somebody who might be progressing towards cirrhosis, such as
a chronic viral hepatitis, or a patient with autoimmune hepatitis, like initis.
And there's something called a fibro scan that's often used, and that's called, and
then we've got vibration-controlled elastography, and we've got sheer wave elastatography.
Just to be aware of it, these are ultrasound-based techniques, which send a wave through the
organ itself, and gives an indication about how stiff the organ is.
And that can say to us, if somebody is progressing towards cirrhosis, so it's increasingly being
used in all over the sort of your work.
And it's probably going to become quite a standard feature in units that deal with the
patients with the conditions of the liver, if not, I think it's already become fairly
standard in centers around the world.
So the LFT, again, we already spoke a little bit about this in terms of how to, like, interpret
--- page 13 ---
the LFT.
When you're given an LFT, a little function test, and asked to, like, here, interpret
the LFT, we're not really asking you to give us the results, like, you know, the ALT is
400, the alkaline phosphatase is 189, et cetera.
What we're asking you to do when we say interpret the LFT is to try and place it into these
three-like groups, is it empathetic, is it called static, or is it, like, you know,
mixed.
Now, often just by staring at the LFT itself, you can see that there's a predominant elevation
of the ALT ASTM that immediately tells you this is a hepatitis, it's empathetic.
So there's cellular destruction from whichever etiology.
You can use a formula called an R-value to help you with that, although usually it's
very obvious whether something is a hepatitis or a cholestatic pattern.
The R-value was primarily created to try and classify patients into different presentations
of drug-induced over-injury, mainly for research, like, in purposes.
But it is also being used in clinical practice to say whether somebody falls into a cholestatic
type of LFT or a empathetic type of picture.
So that's a formula called the R-value, but like I said, it was originally developed mainly
for drug-induced liver-injury, not really for general practice, although, as I said, it's
increasingly being used in practice as well for all sorts of etiologies.
By and large, just the degree of elevation in each of these enzymes can say to you whether
something is obviously a hepatitis or there's obviously cholestasis.
Okay.
And of course, the other thing is that you see on the LFT is the algorithm, and although
the INR you ask for separately, but the algorithm and the INR do give you an indication about
the synthetic function of the organ itself.
Okay.
--- page 14 ---
So the enzyme itself don't really inform us so much about how the organ is actually functioning,
so the LFT is a bit of a mis-you know-ma.
But what does give us some idea about liver function per se, synthetic function, is the
albumin and the INR, okay?
So is it from the way itself hepatic?
So does the patient have risk factors for cirrhosis?
Is it a known patient, for example, with chronic hepatitis C, or hepatitis B, or what do you
mean a bit?
Hyattis or alcohol, does the patient have a strong ethanol history?
Are there signs of cirrhosis, support hypertension?
Are there signs of hepatic encephalopathy?
Hyattis is the liver synthetic function, and you can also look at the child pusco, which
includes many of these ear elements, or what's more often used in terms of patients for your
transplant is the MEL-D score, or the, like a mal-score model for end-stage liver disease,
which tells us about how severe the degree of hepatic function is, that may then place
them higher up on a liver transplant, you know, list if you had access to the liver transplant
in your area.
Hep, etiologies of jaundice, so we're just looking at the organ itself, we're not looking
at extra hepatic etiologies, so what can cause jaundice, and if there's no evidence
of preexisting liver disease, is it acute hepid?
Hyattis, such as viral, drugs, alcohol, autoimmune, aminita filoidies, the death cap like in mushroom,
which is quite severe, and rapidly put, yes, sir, these are all cause of jaundice, ulsins
disease, which is a condition of overload of copper, genetically, it's due to a genetic
mutation in the ATP-7B gene, quite a number of mutations, actually, but just to be aware
of it, so these are conditions that you just need to be aware of, and the reason why I do
include them and make an engine of them, things like hereditary necromatosis, which
--- page 15 ---
is iron overload, and Wilson's disease, is because these are some of the few etiologies
that we can actually reverse with treatment provided, we make the diagnosis, right?
We can actually really stabilize these individuals, although they are a little bit aware, it's
worth being aware of them, at least.
Then there's other causes of hepatic here in jaundice, such as family-related cirrhosis.
Non-alcoholic stiator hepiditis, which is the old, like you can name, about a year ago,
that is now referred to and a large group of steo-totic liver disease, right, steo-totic
liver disease.
Other etiologies include alpha-1 anti-tripsin deficiency, a large tumor burden within the
liver.
You can get a schema to the liver as well, which can give you quite a severe hepititis
and liver condition from hepatic vein occlusion, or IVC occlusion, such as a blood-chialy syndrome,
it's usually referred to as, okay, so that's the liver itself causing dyke in jaundice,
that's the liver pattern, you know, chyma, or biology that affects the liver pattern chyma
itself.
And what about the intra- and extra-patic early system causing cholistatic jaundice?
So firstly, what do we mean when we say cholistasis?
It means an increase in the alkaline phosphatase and the gamma-glutinal transferase would
or without an increase in the bilirubin.
So you can still have cholistasis without your jaundice, okay?
So it can be with or without an increased bilirubin.
Now cholistasis can sometimes be tricky, and one of the key things you need to try to
differentiate with, which can be hard, is is this intra-patic or extra-patic?
Avoid the term surgical, you know, jaundice, and I usually also say to the fellows, avoid
the term obstructor jaundice, because as soon as you say obstructor, it means you are saying
that there is a mechanical obstruction which you have not proven yet from your clinical
--- page 16 ---
examination or you're like in a imaging.
In fact, there's no such thing as surgical, you're jaundice because, you know, you don't
know, it's just, you're a jaundice, okay?
Intra-patic.
So some of the etiologies of intra-patic cholistasis are failure, right?
And they include some of the causes of hepatitis, because if you get a parasite swelling from
inflammation, it is also going to impact on the intra-patic beryllis system and cause
a degree of obstruction.
Again, I want you to avoid the term using obstruction, but it's only where I can probably
describe it, but remember this is that at an intra-patic, like in level, so you won't
be able to see it on your imaging when I was in an ultrasound or CT scan, right?
So some of the well-known causes of intra-patic cholistasis include primary sclerosis in choleninitis
and AIDS-cholengeopathy that we rarely see because we used to see more in the pre-antiretroviral
era.
It can be due to a drug-induced liver injury, and this can be hepoelectric, colostatic,
or you're mixed.
I mentioned some of the progressive familial intra-patic, like in a cholistasis, and an
example of a so-called benign recurrent intra-patic cholistasis, and that is again due to a genetic
mutation in the ile-salt-export protein that you saw on an earlier slide, ESEP.
And then the other etiology that's quite varied and no, right, that can cause a degree
of intra-patic cholistasis include so-called infiltrative etiologies.
That is apathylogical, your term, where the parenchymal of the ulevia itself is now infiltrated
by focal uvision or lesions.
And this includes granuloma from tuberculosis, sarcoid, for example, or tumors, either
inter-patic tumors, tumors within the liver that arise from the ulevia itself, or tumors
from elsewhere, a lymphoma, a colorectal, like in a cancer, for example, that is now
--- page 17 ---
spread to involve the ulevia.
Okay, so we group those infiltrative etiologies also because that they can cause a degree
of intra-patic cholistasis.
Yeah, sort of other etiologies include primary ability colon colon, here, mitis, and these
intra-patic cholistasis is often associated with signs of increased high lipids, hyperlipidemia,
and some of the signs that you can look for and find in these patients, especially those
with primary ability colon, like jitis and PSC include because it's often long-standing
include xanthoermata and xanthoelasma.
Also these patients may have problems with absorption, especially of their soluble vitamins.
But as I said, it can be occasionally, it can be quite difficult to separate intra and
extra hepatic cholistasis.
And this emphasizes the importance in these instances of quality hepatobiliary imaging
to help.
So now, out of the causes of extra hepatic cholistasis giving rise to genres, this is
sometimes easier once you have imaging that confirms that there is something causing,
that there is a lesion or something within the extra-patic cholistasis system, or there's
blurry dilatation, okay.
So like I said, it's a planning problem, you see blurry dilatation imaging usually, but
not always.
Sometimes it can be a bit tricky, especially if it's a small lesion or something early
on, or a stone that's sort of shifting around in there within these EBD.
Some examples include a stricture, which can either be benign or malignant strictures,
the PSC strictures of the extra-patic dilatation system, pancreatic cancer, chronic pancreatitis,
cholidocolytiasis, lymph nodes, occasionally you might even find in a scarless, lumpy
cholidase worm that causes blurry obstruction, that's quite rare nowadays.
But on occasions seen and sometimes inadvertent CB reggation during gallbladder surgery, also
--- page 18 ---
fairly rare, but occurs now and again.
Okay, so here's an example for interest of a patient who was referred for endoscopic ultrasound.
The LFT picture was some elevation, the alkaline phosphatase and the energy T, but there was
also some elevation in the transaminases.
So fairly, like in a mixed, no key etiology could be found, the patient was asked about
alcohol, viral hepatitis, had hepatitis B surface, antigen check, all of your negative.
So, and interestingly enough, there was also a, your recent history of acolysis, you had
tectomy, so the patient had the gallbladder out, the worst stones in the gallbladder was
probably presenting with the recurrent episodes of abdominal, or you write up quadrant, like
in pain, had an ultrasound, stones were seen and subsequently with a gallbladder wall that
was probably thickened, we assumed, and had a recent cholisectomy, but the LFTs were abnormal.
On standard imaging with ultrasound and CT scan elsewhere, there was no intra-patic
ability that it.
Patient and just to orientate here, here's the endoscope with an ultrasound probe in
the second part of the duodenum, sorry, first part of the duodenum and this anechoic structure
we see here is the CBD, the end of the common, like in bile duct, right, the end of the common
ballad, the lower end of the common ballad, and within this CBD, we can see a hyperechoic
lesion within the lumen, and it is casting an acoustic shadow, so here's the ultrasound
wave coming and there's a shadow behind this lesion here, which says to us that it's hard.
And it's hyperechoic, it's hard, it's casting an acoustic shadow, it's a stone.
So this was found on endoscopic ultrasound, and so now we know that this patient must
immediately proceed as early as we can, proceed to an ERCP to have the stone extracted, okay,
endoscopically.
Here's an example of an ERCP, as you can see we introduced the scope, we introduced an
ultra-term type catheter, we fill up the body system with, like in a contrast, and
we do an x-ray imaging, this is actually a fairly normal ERCP, and in this particular
--- page 19 ---
case they've also filled some contrast into the main pancreatic, like a duct, which we
generally try to avoid doing, because one of the risks of ERCP is acute pancreas, your
nucleus, and it can be quite severe, which is the reason why we only do ERCP as far as
we can for therapeutic in-ear tension, not for diagonals, so this is obviously an image
from years ago, and what this is showing you is a very nice normal ERCP, apart from this
filling of the, like in a gallbladder, and what we can see within the gallbladder are
filling, like in defects, and these are stones within the, like in gallbladder, and some
smaller stones within the cystic, like a duct, but there's no stones within the CBD, okay.
This is an example of an MRCP, also showing stones, these sort of square cube cubes,
and you can see these cooidal stones, and the ability system is, like in it is, here
dilated, here we can see a large stone obstructing the CBD low down, main pancreatic, like a duct,
and there's gross intra and extra-patic belary dialer in-tation, okay, so these stones, usually
we will try to remove them endoscopically within ERCP, they can be quite hard sometimes
to extract, and but there's various tricks, we use balloons, askers, et cetera, rarely do
we sometimes have to ask the surgeon to go and do a CBD exploration to completely remove
these stones, usually it's after we've failed within ERCP, but often we know, you know, if
a stone is going to be hard to remove, and then fairly early on we might make the decision
at ERCP that this patient should rather proceed to having a CBD exploration in the operating
room with the surgeons rather than with physicians to completely clear the CBD. Here's also an
example of an MRCP of a patient with PSC, and that's the histology showing you the classical
onion skin ring fibrosis that occurs in these patients, it's an immune-mediated disease of the
bleedy system, and what you can see is this irregulars, stricturing of the intra-patic
belary does it can affect the extra-patic belary system, it can affect both the intra and the
extra-patic belary system, but you can see irregular areas of stricturing, there's beating focal
areas of a patient, and here's the corresponding ERCP image, and again you can see these biologues are
completely irregular if you compare to that previous ERCP or for what was essentially a normal
--- page 20 ---
belary system. So like I said, we don't normally do an ERCP, this is an old image of a patient, PSC,
just to make a diagnosis of PSC, we'd be happy just with the MRCP, and you don't really need to
check the patient to increase your risk by proceeding to an ERCP just to make a diagnosis.
In certain instances, only if you're going to do a stricture ballooning, etc,
we do their need to proceed to ERCP, but just to make a diagnosis of PSC and MRCP these days is
quite sufficient. Okay, so just to go over it quickly, so when confronted by a patient with
like a journalist, this is the process you will go through and can probably apply this to other
key clinical present limitations or signs, and this includes collection of information,
collection of like a data from your history, your examination, and appropriate investing
agents. As I told you, when it comes to capability imaging, for example, we are quite spoiled with
CTs and MRIs and endoscopic ultrasound, etc. So appropriately selected investing
like negations, then you analyze that, which basically means you reflect on it, and we think
about it as I showed you earlier, what is the anatomical area that might be involved here,
the physiology and what are the likely path, the anthology that is the most
probably going on, and that you are analyzing what you collect from your history examination
and the appropriate investigations. And then you synthesize it, what is the
clinical problem and the most likely cause? That's your clinical assessment, your comprehensive
and succinct clinical evaluation. And from there, you then need to move on to action.
Otherwise, some people call it a plan, I'll say it's action because remember, ultimately you need
to act, right? That's why they presented to the hospital. That's why the patient came to hospital,
not simply for you to analyze and synthesize, but they came there for some kind of action.
So that might involve a definitive investigation patient may have to have an MRCP for a definitive
order biopsy or something. And of course, an action also includes appropriate treatment.
And that's the end of an approach to join us.
