--- page 1 ---
Connective tissue disease 
Connective tissue diseases (CTD) are a group of disease resulting from persisting immune 
inflammation in genetically predisposed individuals. The immune dysregulation results in 
generation of autoreactive T cells and autoantibodies. Immune cells can attack any organ of 
the body, resulting in wide array of signs and symptoms. 
 
The CTD are classified as: 
1. Systemic lupus erythematosus 
2. Systemic sclerosis or scleroderma 
3. Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIM) 
4. Sjogren’s syndrome 
5. Antiphospholipid syndrome 
6. Mixed Connective tissue disease 
 
Characteristics of the autoimmune CTD: 
• 
There are hereditary or genetic. 
• 
The disease is precipitated by environmental factors, drugs, infections, trauma and 
psychosocial stressors 
• 
More common in women of childbearing age due to the hormonal effects. 
• 
There is autoantibody production. 
• 
Clinical manifestations in the diseases vary between patients. 
 
The disease are associated with a high morbidity and mortality due to immunosuppressive 
effects, therefore individuals are prone to infections, major organ involvement (heart/ 
lung/kidneys and brain). 
 
Systemic lupus erythematosus. 
Initially presents with nonspecific symptoms like fatigue, fever, myalgia, arthralgia and 
Raynaud’s phenomenon. To make a diagnosis, a high index of suspicion is required. 
 
Clinical manifestations. 
Cutaneous manifestations 
- 
Acute cutaneous features: 
Malar rash/ butterfly rash, which is erythematous over the cheeks, flat or raised, 
sparing the nasolabial folds. Heals with hyperpigmentation 
Erythematous papular rash 
Photosensitivity on the sun exposed area 
Mouth or nasopharyngeal ulcers which are usually painless 
 
- 
Subacute cutaneous manifestation: 
Non-itchy psoriasis like, papulo-squamous rash on the upper back, chest and upper 
arms. 
Annular or polycystic plagues - that clear centrally, typically non-scaring. 
 
- 
Chronic cutaneous manifestations 
Discoid lesions: erythematous raised plagues with keratotic scaling and follicular 
plugging. Atrophic scarring may occur cause scarring alopecia. 
Panniculitis: inflammation of the subcutaneous tissues, resulting in firm, deep, tender 
nodules which may persist for months. 
Lesions heal leaving dented, atrophic scars this is called lupus profundus. 
 
Bullous lesion 


--- page 2 ---
- 
Nonspecific cutaneous features 
Nonscarring alopecia (diffuse hair thinning) 
Urticaria 
Livedo reticularis described as mottled reticulated vascular pattern (net-like/ lace-like) 
appearance on the lower limbs, thighs and inner upper arms 
Raynaud’s phenomenon 
 
Musculoskeletal manifestations 
- 
Arthralgia is the earliest and most common manifestation 
Arthritis involves more than 2 peripheral joints with synovitis, typically non-erosive with 
reducible deformities (Jaccoud’s arthropathy) 
Myositis with mild to moderate elevation in muscle weakness, 
Myopathy in SLE commonly due to steroid therapy 
 
Renal manifestations: 
- 
Ranges from asymptomatic proteinuria to rapidly progressive lupus nephritis 
associated with end-stage renal disease. 
- 
Presents with pedal oedema due to hypoalbuminemia, elevated blood pressure 
- 
Urine analysis - dipstick may show proteinuria, haematuria and casts (red blood cell/ 
white cell cast or granular cast) 
- 
Urine protein creatinine ratio of > 0.05g/dL and 24hour urine protein > 1g/ 24 hours is 
considered significant. 
- 
UPCR of > 0.3g/dl considered nephrotic range. It is important to exclude a urinary tract 
infection that may account for the elevated proteinuria 
 
Haematological: 
- 
Haemolysis and cytopenia are common at presentation. 
- 
Haemolytic anaemia 
Maybe auto-antibody mediated or Coomb’s positive 
Clinical features are pallor or jaundice (due to high unconjugated bilirubin) 
Laboratory findings 
Elevated lactate dehydrogenase and bilirubin, 
Full blood count - the HB is low with elevated reticulocyte count 
Peripheral smear may show spherocytes and schistocytes. 
- 
Leucopenia <4000U/L, 
- 
Thrombocytopenia of < 100 000U/L 
- 
Cardiopulmonary disease: 
Serositis is exudative, and it is important to exclude TB. 
Pulmonary hypertension may develop secondary to a vasculitis and Interstitial lung 
disease, on history individuals may present with persisting dry cough and dyspnoea. 
Myocarditis and ischaemic heart disease may also occur in SLE 
 
Neuropsychiatric manifestation: divide into cognitive, central and peripheral disorders. 
Headaches, seizures and psychiatric disorder being the common manifestation. 
It is important to exclude the secondary pathophysiological mechanism related to 
infections, uraemia and drugs in individuals presenting with neurological manifestations 
 
Autoantibody assays in SLE 
- 
Antinuclear factor (ANF): testing with the Hep 2 cell is positive in high titres 
Extractable antinuclear antibodies: Presence anti-Smith antibody (anti-Sm) and anti - 
double stranded DNA antibody (anti ds DNA) 


--- page 3 ---
Complement consumption (low complement). 
 
- 
Anti-Ds DNA, low complement and increased acute phase reactants (CRP and 
ESR) are features of disease activity. 
 
Table 1: classification criteria for SLE 
 
The criteria have subsequently been revised to aid with earlier diagnosis 
 


--- page 4 ---
 
 
Management of SLE 
This depends on the severity of organ involvement 


--- page 5 ---
 
Figure 1; Algorithm to SLE management 
  
Systemic Scleroderma. 
Clinical expression in scleroderma includes vascular, fibrosis and immunological features. 
 
1. Fibrotic features: Inflammation activate fibroblast to synthesize collagen and 
fibronectin resulting in fibrosis in the lower dermis of the skin and internal organs. 
 
Limited systemic scleroderma skin involvement is limited to the distal the elbows, 
knees, and face. 
Diffuse systemic scleroderma: involvement is proximal the elbows, knees, face and 
trunk. 
 
Skin manifestations: initially there is oedema due to the inflammation, therefore 
individuals present with puffy hands and face, followed by skin indurated and 
tightening over weeks and months and lastly become atrophic with contractures. 
Hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation of the skin may occur( salt and paper 
rash) 
 
Face: skin tightening resulting in thinning of the lips, reduced mouth aperture and 
puckering of the lips. Beak like nose, salt and pepper appearance, expressionless 
face. 


--- page 6 ---
Hands: sclerodactyly which is a thickening of the digits leading to flexion contractions 
and poor hand function. 
 
GIT: oesophageal dysmotility where individuals reports dysphagia, barium swallow 
show hypomotility of the distal portion of the oesophagus. 
Other features include gastritis, Gastro-oesophageal reflux, reduced peristalsis in 
the small bowel leading to stasis, intestinal dilatation and bacterial overgrowth 
resulting in diarrhoea. 
Malnutrition due to poor absorption. 
 
Cardiopulmonary: Interstitial lung disease 
Pulmonary hypertension. 
Restrictive cardiomyopathy due to myocardial fibrosis and arrythmias. 
 
Autoantibody assays in Scleroderma 
Anti- nuclear factor positive 90 - 95% 
Anti -centromere antibody commonly in limited scleroderma 
Anti -scleroderma 70 / topoisomerase: in diffuse scleroderma 
Anti RNA polymerase III in scleroderma 
 
2. Vasculopathy: there is endothelial damage involving the arteries, arterioles and 
capillaries causing vasoconstriction. This results in : 
Raynaud’s phenomenon 
Telangiectasia: this are dilated capillaries typically blanching, occur on the skin of 
the face and chest, palmer surface of hands, oesophagus and bowel 
Pulmonary hypertension 
Scleroderma renal crisis (kidneys) 
 
Raynaud’s phenomenon is characterised as primary (idiopathic) or secondary 
Secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon is commonly seen in autoimmune disease. 
In localised scleroderma the Raynaud’s phenomenon precede the onset of the disease 
while in diffuse scleroderma it may develops concurrently with other symptoms. 
 
It is characterised by triphasic colour change. Initially pale or white due to 
vasoconstriction (vasospasm), then blue due to the deoxygenated blood on the 
peripheries and lastly red due sudden opening of the blood vessels (vasodilation). 
It is precipitated by cold, clinically the extremities fingers and toes are cold on 
examination 
Nose, ears and arteries of the heart can also be involved. 
Repeated Raynaud’s phenomenon on the digits leads to Ischaemic tissue damage 
resulting in 
Digital ulcers, when healed they cause pits (pitting ulcer) 
Acro-osteolysis resulting in pseudo-clubbing. 
Gangrene with autoamputation of the digits 
Due to vasculopathy there is nail fold capillary changes on fundoscopy (dilated 
loops of capillaries, busy appearance, paucity of the vessels and drop out) 
 
Primary Raynaud’s phenomenon: Characteristic features are- 
1. Common in female, ages 15 to 30 years 
2. No ischaemic changes 
3. Nail fold capillary changes are normal 
4. No autoantibodies (ANF negative). 


--- page 7 ---
 
 
Management 
The management depends on the organ involved. Basic principles 
 
Idiopathic Inflammatory Myositis 
Symmetrical proximal muscle weakness, shoulder and pelvic girdle develops over weeks 
and months. They complain of difficulty getting up from a sitted position or squatting, walking 
up the stairs, combing their hair or taking objects from a higher position. 
50% of individuals presents with muscle pain. 
The weakness results in an unsteady and waddling gait 
 


--- page 8 ---
Cutaneous manifestations have been noted in dermatomyositis 
Heliotrope rash, Gottrons papules, V neck sign, shawl sign, holster sign, calcinosis and 
periungual erythema and nailfold telangiectasia 
antisynthetase syndrome: mechanic hands. 
Involvement of the pharynx and larynx results in bulbar weakness, individual reports of nasal 
speech, poor cough and difficulty in swallowing. Respiratory muscle weakness may lead to 
respiratory failure. 
 
Idiopathic Inflammatory Myositis are classified as 
1. Polymyositis 
2. Dermatomyositis 
3. Inclusion body myositis (>50yrs, more in males, asymmetrical proximal and distal 
muscle weakness) 
4. Necrotising inflammatory myositis 
5. Overlap syndrome 
6. Antisynthetase syndrome characterised by arthritis, interstitial lung disease, 
mechanic hands, Raynaud’s phenomenon 
7. Myositis associated with malignancy - in individuals In > 45years as a 
paraneoplastic manifestation. Cancer of the lung, breast, ovary, bowel and stomach. 
8. 
Diagnosis is suspected on clinical grounds 
confirmed by elevation in muscle enzymes (creatinine kinase, AST and ALT) 
electromyography changes 
Muscle biopsy assists in classifying the type of myositis. 
 
Management 
Supportive management 
1. 
NG tube if there is bulbar weakness 
2. Speech therapy 
3. Physiotherapy 
 


--- page 9 ---
Table : diagnostic criteria 


--- page 10 ---
Antiphospholipid syndrome. 
Antiphospholipid antibodies bind to plasm proteins with affinity for phospholipids surface 
resulting in blood coagulation 
 
Classification for APLS 
Primary APSL 
Secondary APLS associated with other connective tissue disease commonly SLE, found in 
about 30 – 50% 
 
Characteristics of antiphospholipid syndrome 
Presents as arterial and venous thrombosis (unprovoked, recurrent and thrombosis at 
unusual sites subclavian, hepatic, renal and mesenteric vessels) 
Recurrent pregnancy losses 
Cutaneous manifestations include livedo reticularis, skin ulcers and necrosis 
Haematological may presents with thrombocytopenia and coombs positive haemolytic 
anaemia 
Clinical presentation may vary, including valvular heart disease, neurological 
manifestation chorea, seizures and strokes 
 
Immunological assay to make a diagnosis – Tested 6 weeks apart 
1. Anticardiolipin antibody 
2. Beta 2 glycoprotein 
3. Lupus coagulant. 
4. Antiprothrombin antibodies. 
 
Table: APLS diagnostic criteria 
