--- page 1 ---
Gout 
 
1. Definition  
Gout is an inflammatory disease, which results from the deposition of monosodium 
monohydrate crystals in the joints and tissues. The formation of the crystals is due to 
persistently elevated uric acid of >0.4mmol/L.. Crystal shedding into the joint lead to recurrent 
episodes of inflammatory arthritis,  and accumulation in the tissues occurs on the cartilage, 
tendon, bursae and bones leads to tophi.  
There are individuals with asymptomatic hyperuricemia. Osteoarthritis joints are prone to 
developing gouty arthritis 
 
2. Epidemiology. 
Serum uric acid concentrations are both age and sex dependent. Uric acid rise is associated 
with the onset of puberty in males and menopause in females. Gout is rare in males under the 
age of 30 years and in premenopausal women due to uricosuric effects of oestrogen. Onset 
of gout in men under 30 years is usually associated with inherited defect in the purine 
degradation pathway, alcoholism and renal insufficiency. 
 
The peak age for onset of gout in males is 40 – 50 years and 60 years in women. The 
prevalence in older women is associated with increased use of diuretic therapy. Risk factors 
for developing hyperuricemia or gout, which are modifiable, are obesity, alcohol use, high 
protein diet, hypertension, diabetes mellitus (metabolic syndrome) and dyslipidaemia. 
Nonmodifiable risk factors are age and gender. 
 
3. Uric acid metabolism  
Uric acid is the product of degradation of purine synthesis see figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1: Uric acid production 
 
The amount of uric acid in the body is the net results of the amount produced and amount 
excreted. Approximately there is 60% daily turnover. See figure 2 
Allopurinol and febuxostat 


--- page 2 ---
Figure 2: Uric acid pathway 
 
4. Causes of hyperuricemia. 
Pathogenic processes responsible for development of hyperuricemia include overproduction, 
due to endogenous or exogenous dietary purine, and under secretion, due to abnormal renal 
handling. 
 
Genetic (Primary) account for about 20% of the cause of hyperuricemia and this is due to 
inherited enzyme abnormalities in the uric acid synthesis, e.g.  deficiency of HGPRT 
(hypoxanthine- 
guanine 
phosphoribosyl 
transferase) 
and 
overactivity 
of 
the 
PRPP(phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate) 
 
Acquired (Secondary) accounts about 80% of the causes of hyperuricemia and this is due 
to overproduction and underexcretion. 
 
Urate overproduction is due to excess dietary purine consumption, accelerated hepatic ATP 
degradation in alcohol, and increased nucleotide turn over in myeloproliferative and 
lymphoproliferative disease and psoriasis 
 
Urate underexcretion is due to renal disease, lead poisoning, inhibition of tubular urate 
secretion in ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis, drugs e.g.  diuretics/ ethambutol and 
pyrazinamide/ low dose aspirin (list long refer to Kumar and Clark). 
 
5. Clinical features of hyperuricemia 
 
• 
Asymptomatic: elevated uric acid without the disease only a small number develop 
gout. Those who develop gout will have had the asymptomatic hyperuricemia for more 
than 20 years. The individuals are at low risk of nephrolithiasis and renal insufficiency. 
They require serial uric acid monitoring. 
 
• 
Acute gouty arthritis: rapid development of severe pain, swelling with overlying 
erythema and tenderness that reaches its maximum within 12 - 48 hours. Often starting 
at night or early morning when the joint is coolest. It resembles cellulitis with erythema 
extending beyond the joint line. Arthritis commonly resolves completely in 5-10 days. 
The serum uric acid level may be normal during the acute attacks. 
 
Often gout presents as mono-arthritis in about 80%. The lower extremity, 
particularly the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint is commonly involved. Other 
joints that can be involved include the ankles, midfoot, knees, wrist and elbows 
 


--- page 3 ---
Polyarticular gout is common in elderly individuals with a history of diuretics use and 
renal insufficiency 
 
Events that may trigger an acute attack are trauma, infections, surgery, postoperative, 
rapid weight loss, starvation, alcohol, purine intake red meat/ high protein diet) 
 
• 
Chronic tophaceous gout: results from repeated acute gout attacks that is untreated, 
undiagnosed or inadequately treated. This results in widespread deposition of urate in 
joints, tendons, bursae, cartilage, bone. Periarticular deposits lead to a halo of radio-
opacity and punched out lesion on the bone seen on radiography. 
• 
 
Tophus develops in about 10 years after initial diagnosis of gout, and maybe 
presenting manifestations in elderly women on diuretics and renal disease. This may 
damage the bone and joints. The tophus may be inflamed and ulcerate, discharge 
chalky material resembling pus 
 
• 
Renal disease associated with hyperuricemia is mainly uric acid stones 
(nephrolithiasis) and nephropathy (acute uric acid nephropathy and chronic uric acid 
nephropathy) 
 
Nephrolithiasis: It may precede the onset of clinical gout. The risk of developing renal 
stones are associated with high uric acid level > 0.45mmol /L and low uric acid excretion. 
Other factors favouring stone formation are dehydration, reduced urine volume and 
decreased urine pH (acidity) 
 
Acute uric acid nephropathy: is also referred to as tumor lysis syndrome. There is a massive 
overproduction and under excretion of uric acid following chemotherapy. Therefore, there 
is precipitation of uric acid crystals in the collecting ducts and ureters resulting in renal 
failure. 
Chronic urate nephropathy: deposition of monosodium crystals in the renal interstitial tissue 
with a surrounding immune reaction. This may result in proteinuria and rarely cause renal 
dysfunction. 
 
6. Diagnosis 
Definite diagnosis is by demonstration of uric acid crystals in synovial fluid or synovial 
tissue biopsy. 
 
The crystals are needle shaped and negative birefringent on polarized microscopy. 
Serum uric acid elevated, in about 30% of patients only, but it can be normal due to 
generation of IL- 6 which facilitate renal uric acid excretion. 
 
7. Investigation  
Serum uric acid 
Synovial fluid analysis: crystals-tophaceous material 
24 hour urine -uric acid if suspecting primary gout, renal function 
Screen for associated conditions (hypertension/diabetes mellitus/ dyslipidemia and 
metabolic syndrome 
Imaging: radiography, ultrasonography,  and CT scan 
 
8. Treatment 
Principals of management 
Provide rapid and safe pain relief 
Prevent further attacks. 
Prevent formation of tophi and destructive arthritis 
Addressing associated metabolic conditions. 
 
Asymptomatic hyperuricemia if no other co-morbidities: serial monitoring of uric acid 
level  


--- page 4 ---
Acute gouty arthritis  
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, caution in elderly individuals, those with peptic ulcer 
disease, renal insufficiency and cardiac failure 
  
If NSAIDS contraindicated COXIB --- celebrex  
 
COLCHICINE Load with 0.1mg and then 0,5mg every 12 hours (use with caution in-patient 
with renal insufficiency) 
 
CORTICOSTEROIDS in individuals with renal disease, or where NSAIDS are contraindicated. 
Give prednisone 40mg daily for 7-10 days  
Intraarticular injection/ IMI steroids also benefecial 
 Exclude infections before administration of steroids. 
 
Uric acid lowering therapy it is important to avoid sudden fluctuations in serum uric acid 
concentration. Urate lowering therapy are contraindicated during the acute attack because it 
can worsen or prolong the acute episode by causing the shedding of the crystals from the 
joint. 
 
Not everyone presenting with acute gout requires treatment with uric acid lowering therapy. 
The following are indications for starting therapy  
• More than two attacks per year  
• Chronic tophaceous gout  
• Nephropathy 
• Urate renal stones 
 
Urate lowering drugs  
• 
Probenecid: uricosuric drug 
Indicated in individuals who are below 60 years of age with low urine uric acid 
excretion, creatinine clearance over 80ml/min and no history of nephrolithiasis. 
 
• 
Allopurinol and Febuxostat – Xanthine oxidase inhibitor, indicated in individuals 
who are above 60 years of age, poor response to probenacid, tophaceous gout, 
nephrolithiasis and tumor lysis syndrome. To use with caution in-patient with renal 
insufficiency because they are prone to developing hypersensitivity syndrome. 
• 
Allopurinol is available to us and used as first line 
 
• 
Lesinurad – chronic refractory gout, URAT 1 inhibitor. 
Add on therapy, currently not in the country 
 
• 
Biologic therapy: Interleukin 1(anakinra) inhibitor  
 
9. Targets in treatment of gout are as ffg: 
 
Asymptomatic 
 
Uric acid level < 0.35mmol/L 
 
Optimise and screen for metabolic disease 
 
10. Life style modification  
Patient education 
Diet modification : avoid purine containing foods eg alcohol, tomatoes, lentils 
Weight loss  
Physical activity. 
 
 
 


--- page 5 ---
Case scenario: please answer the following questions. The answers are in the lecture 
notes, additional text notes and text book (Davidson/Kumar and Clark) 
These are not meant to be exhaustive questions on the topic, but the basic minimum 
knowledge you shoud have. 
 
A 56 years old man presents with acute onset of pain and swelling of the right 
knee. He has hypertension and is on hydrochlorothiazide. His  body mass index 
is 42kg/m2. The rheumatoid factor and anti citrullinated peptide tests are 
negative 
 
1. What is the differential diagnosis for his presentation? 
2. What are the differentiating features of gout from other inflammatory arthritis on history 
and examination? 
3. Which joints are usually affected in acute gout? 
4. What are the predisposing factors for gout in this patient? 
5. What are the trigger factors for acute attack?  
6. How will you confirm the diagnosis of gout? 
 
A 63 years old woman with hypertension and diabetes mellitus presents with 
polyarticular joint pain and swelling for three months duration. She has small 
tophiat the MCP joints and bilateral elbows. The urea is 20mmol/L  creatinine 
230µmol/L. 
 
7. Which drug is contraindicated in her acute management  
8. Why is not advisable to start the urate lowering therapy in this patient 
immediadetely? 
9. When will you iniate urate lowering therapy? 
10. Which urate lowering drug will you use in this patient. 
 
 
 
 
