--- page 1 ---
LECTURE NOTES: NECK PAIN 
 
Neck pain is a common problem that many of us will experience at some time in our lives. 
Disabling neck pain, while less common, is still a major cause of morbidity in the community 
affecting around 4% of the community. Various factors influence who gets neck pain, for e.g. 
people in certain jobs may be more likely to experience neck pain. 
 
The exact site of the neck pain may be difficult to localise. There are many structures around 
the neck that may cause pain, and this may be experienced by the patient as ‘neck pain’. 
This is referred pain. Structures in the cervical spine may be the source of pain, and this may 
be mechanical or inflammatory. 
 
Important ANATOMY to revise: 
The important anatomical structures which may result in neck pain are: 
• 
Vertebral body 
• 
Vertebral arch which consists of the pedicles, laminae, facet joints, transverse and 
spinous processes 
• 
Vertebral canal and intervertebral foramina (with the spinal cord and nerve roots) 
which lie between the body and arch 
• 
Intervertebral disc 
• 
Ligaments and muscles 
 
ACUTE NECK PAIN: 
The majority of neck pain is acute and self-limiting, and due to mechanical problems. 
Some common causes of acute neck pain include: 
Wry neck: 
Patient will report severe neck pain and stiffness, typically occurring at night, and 
disturbing sleep. The common cause is mal-alignment of the facet joints. 
X-rays will be normal. 
The pain usually settles in a few days, with analgesia and anti-inflammatories. 
Sometimes muscle relaxants are used to improve muscle spasm and pain. 
 
Acute disc protrusion: 
Cervical disc prolapse is much less common than lumbar disc prolapse. It is caused by 
sudden twisting movements or whiplash injuries (e.g. during a motor vehicle accident). The 
pain is severe and aggravated by head movements. The pain may be referred down into the 
shoulder and arm. Clinically there is marked muscle spasm, muscle weakness and 
diminished reflexes. Cord compression could occur if the protrusion is posterior, resulting in 
myelopathy. 
The x-rays will be normal. 
Treatment includes analgesia and immobilisation (with a soft collar). 
 
CHRONIC NECK PAIN: 
Chronic neck pain is typically musculoskeletal in nature. However, one needs to exclude 
other serious and potentially treatable pathology, such as a disc abscess or neoplastic 
disease affecting the spine. 
 
Disc abscess: Infection is usually blood borne and due to pyogenic organisms such as 
Staphylococcus aureus, and less commonly to brucellosis, typhoid and tuberculosis. The 
patient is ill and toxic with fever and severe pain. Inflammatory markers and white cell count 
will be elevated. Radiographs are initially normal but later show destruction of the disc (disc 
narrowing) and adjacent vertebral bodies. A blood culture and needle biopsy are needed to 
confirm the diagnosis. Management consists of rest and antibiotics; occasionally open 
drainage or decompression is necessary. 
 
 
TB Spine: 


--- page 2 ---
Spinal TB typically affects two adjacent vertebrae with bone softening, erosions and disc 
space narrowing. A ‘cold abscess’ forms and a kyphosis (known as a gibbus) develops. 
The cold abscess can compress the spinal cord causing neurological compromise. 
Treatment is bed rest, anti-tuberculous therapy and surgical decompression in the 
presence of neurological involvement. 
 
Neoplasms: 
These patients have persistent back pain which is not relieved by rest. The pain is often 
worse at night and with recumbency. Fever and weight loss are common symptoms. The 
neoplastic lesions infiltrate the spinal cord and vertebral column, and extensive root signs 
may be present. The neoplasms may be benign local tumours such as neurofibromas, but 
more commonly represent metastases from a primary cancer elsewhere in the body. 
X-rays may show lytic lesions. A bone scan is often more sensitive than x-ray in 
detecting secondary deposits. 
 
‘RED FLAGS’ FOR NON-MECHANICAL NECK PAIN: 
Certain ‘red flags’ should alert the physician that the neck pain is not mechanical, and that 
further assessment/investigation is required. These include: 
• 
Age 
• 
Past history of cancer – think of metastatic bone disease 
• 
Recent surgery/infection 
• 
Immunosuppression 
• 
Fever, weight loss, systemic disease 
 
There are several structures in the neck which may give rise to pain. These need careful 
consideration as many conditions affecting these structures are potentially treatable and/or 
life-threatening. 
 
INFLAMMATORY NECK PAIN: 
Polymyalgia rheumatica: 
Most common in women over the age of 50 years. Symptoms include pain and stiffness in 
proximal muscles of the shoulder and hip girdles. Pain is worse in the mornings or after 
periods of inactivity (e.g. after a long car ride) and improve as the day progresses. 
 
Inflammatory myositis: Inflammatory disease affecting the muscles (mainly proximal 
muscles). Other features include dysphagia, dyspnoea and interstitial lung disease. 
The creatine kinase will be elevated – often markedly so. 
Electromyography and muscle biopsy can confirm the diagnosis. 
Treatment is with steroids and steroid-sparing agents (including methotrexate, 
azathioprine). 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA): Although RA typically spares most of the spine, it can affect the 
cervical spine. Patients may present with a symmetrical polyarthritis affecting the small joints 
and report neck pain or numbness/paraesthesiae of the fingers. 
C1C2 subluxation and erosion of the odontoid peg are typical complications. Flexion- 
extension x-ray views and open-mouthed views of the cervical spine are required to 
properly visualise these structures. 
 
Ankylosing spondylitis: Inflammatory disease typically affecting the spine. The cervical 
spine is commonly affected. Early in the disease x-rays may be normal. One should look 
specifically for sacroiliitis. 
 
 
 


--- page 3 ---
OTHER CAUSES OF NECK PAIN: 
Fibromyalgia: Widespread pain syndrome with ‘tender points’ (defined as localised pain with 
pressure), 
multiple other somatic symptoms. Treatment includes aerobic exercise, anti-depressants 
and counselling. Steroids have no role here. 
 
Myofascial pain syndrome: 
Characterised by ‘trigger points’ (radiation of muscle pain distal to the area of 
pressure). 
Treatment is with local injections with anaesthetic agents and corticosteroids (hence 
differentiation between tender and trigger points is important here). 
 
Trauma:Flexion injuries result in compressive forces to vertebral bodies and discs and 
distractive forces on the posterior elements and neck muscles. Extension injuries result in 
compression of the posterior structures and distraction of the anterior structures. Extension 
injuries carry a worse prognosis for the development of chronic pain. 
 
ASSESSMENT OF NECK PAIN: 
A careful history and clinical examination can direct the doctor to the cause of the pain. 
Differentiating factors include: 
Quality of pain: 
Mechanic pain is dull, deep, aching pain, with short-lived exacerbations 
Shooting, ‘electric’ type pain, paraesthesiae/numbness suggests involvement of 
neural structures 
Deep, unremitting pain suggests ongoing distension/deformity or invasion of pain- 
sensitive structures 
 
Nerve root disorders: 
Signs will include loss of reflexes, dermatomal sensory loss, myotomal motor 
weakness 
Can be confirmed by nerve conduction studies 
 
Frequency and duration: 
Mechanical pain is episodic, related to movement and exertion and made worse by 
particular postures or movements. It is improved with rest and immobility. 
Pain that is not altered by movement and which worsens spontaneously suggests a 
sinister underlying cause. 
 
Site and radiation: 
Intrinsic neck pain radiates into the head and down onto the shoulders. 
Headache is common with upper cervical pathology, especially C3 and above. 
Pain from lower cervical structures can be referred to the shoulder girdle, arm and 
inter-scapular area and chest wall. 
Dermatomal distribution of pain can alert one to specific areas of the spine that may 
be involved. 
 
Clinical examination: 
To exclude other conditions such as infections, malignancy, inflammatory arthritides. 
Multiple structures in the neck may be the source of neck pain and must be assessed 
Assess posture and movements of the neck. 
Neurological examination is essential. 
 
 
 


--- page 4 ---
INVESTIGATIONS: 
Plain x-ray: Useful in trauma, fracture, subluxation, for primary bone disorders (e.g. Paget’s 
disease of bone), infection, malignancy, and in rheumatological conditions such as 
rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. 
 
CT scan: Assessment of bony structures. 
 
MRI scan: Disc herniation, intra-cord pathology, osteomyelitis. 20% of asymptomatic patients 
have an abnormal MRI; 60% of older patients have abnormal intervertebral discs – thus, not 
always a discriminating investigation. 
 
Isotope bone scan: Sensitive for bony pathology such as metastasis, infection. Useful to 
differentiate inflammatory from degenerative change. 
 
MANAGEMENT OF NON-MECHANICAL PAIN: 
Management of the underlying condition. 
 
MANAGEMENT OF MECHANICAL PAIN: 
Majority of neck pain resolves within a few weeks or months. Less than 10% have persisting 
moderate or severe pain. 
 
Analgesia: 
Safe over a long period; opioids reserved for severe, refractory cases (risk of 
abuse/dependence); Tricyclic anti-depressants in low doses can have analgesic 
properties. 
 
Exercises: 
Aims to restore normal range of movement and strengthen neck musculature. This 
helps to prevent acute exacerbations and progression to chronic pain. 
Physical therapy includes a variety of modalities including hot and cold compresses, 
traction, ultrasound and massage. 
Chiropractic manipulation aims to correct subluxation and stretch tight joint capsules. 
Physical therapy and chiropractic manipulation both have limited benefit in acute 
neck pain. 
 
Other: 
Maintaining correct posture, ergonomic modification of workplace environment, 
reducing extreme movements of the neck, limit time spent in a fixed cervical posture 
(e.g. in front of a computer screen). 
 
Surgical interventions: 
Injection of the zygo-apophyseal joints with steroid/anaesthetic – limited benefit. 
Disc excision/fusion in specific cases. 
 
There is no long-term differences between the various modalities of therapy and the choice 
hinges on minimising harm. Surgery is unlikely to effect a cure and should be recommended 
only in specific situations e.g. neurologic compromise. 
 
 


--- page 5 ---
LECTURE NOTES - LOW BACK PAIN 
 
DEFINITION: pain localised below the line of the 12th rib and above the inferior gluteal 
folds, with or without leg pain. 
 
Low back pain (LBP) is a very common problem affecting over 80% of the population at 
some time during life. It is one of the most common reasons for GP visits. It is the leading 
cause of limitation of activity in patients under 45 years of age and is the commonest single 
cause of work-related disability and requests for compensation. Back pain is a symptom, not 
a diagnosis, and may arise from different anatomical structures and result from different 
disease states. 
 
The natural history of low back pain is encouraging. Most patients report resolution of 
symptoms within 2-4 weeks, and the majority (90%) will resolve within two-three months. 
However, for patients off work for more than six months, only 50% will return to the 
workforce. Almost nobody returns to work after 2 years of absence. 
 
Patients with depression are more likely to report chronic pain, including LBP, and patients 
with chronic LBP are also more likely to be depressed. The treatment of pain can also lead 
to alcohol and substance abuse problems. 
Anxiety and personality disorders can often prolong episodes of pain and may contribute to 
the pain becoming chronic. 
 
90% of LBP is mechanical, arising from musculo-ligamentous injuries, degeneration of the 
discs/facet joints, spinal stenosis, disc herniation, osteoporotic compression fractures or 
spondylosis and spondylolisthesis. 
 
 
CLINCAL EVALUATION: 
• 
Is there a systemic disease causing the pain? As with neck pain, it is important not to 
miss any serious or potentially treatable medical conditions which may be causing 
the pain. 
• 
Is there neurologic compromise? This may require urgent surgical 
evaluation/intervention. 
• 
Are the any social or psychological factors that may amplify or prolong pain? 
 
Potential causes of serious LBP include: 
• 
Herniated discs 
• 
Spinal stenosis 
• 
Cauda equine syndrome 
• 
Inflammatory spondyloarthropathy 
• 
Spinal infection 
• 
Vertebral fracture 
• 
Malignancy 
• 
Referred visceral pain 
 
Certain ‘red flags’ should raise the alarm that further investigation may be required. 
These include: 
• 
Fever and weight loss, systemic upset (malignancy, infection) 
• 
Nocturnal pain, pain with recumbency (malignancy) 
• 
Age over 50 with new-onset pain 
• 
History of malignancy 
• 
Persistent pain lasting > 6 weeks 
• 
Abnormal neurology 
• 
Morning stiffness 
 


--- page 6 ---
Investigations which may be necessary include: 
• 
Blood counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
• 
Calcium, alkaline phosphatase 
• 
Protein electrophoresis, immunoglobulins 
• 
C-reactive protein, HLA B27 
• 
Imaging (x-rays, CT scans, MRI scans) 
 
MANAGEMENT OF NON-SPECIFIC LOW BACK PAIN: 
If any specific cause is found, this should be managed according to its own merits. The 
various modalities which are available to manage non-specific low back pain include the 
following: 
 
Patient education: Following a careful clinical assessment, patients should be reassured that 
a medical cause for the back pain is highly unlikely, spontaneous recovery is the rule, and 
those who remain active despite pain have less future chronic pain (exercise has prevention 
power). 
 
Bed rest: The current view is that bed rest is NOT advised. Studies show that any more 
than one or two days of bed rest can actually make the pain worse and may reduce muscle 
tone and flexibility. As far as possible patients should be encouraged to maintain normal 
activity. 
 
Drug therapy: Short-term use to permit activity and improve symptoms. Oral anti-inflammatory 
drugs (lowest effective dose, shortest possible duration) are most effective. Cautious use of 
opioids in severe, refractory cases only, due to the risk for dependence and abuse. If no 
improvement is noted with opioids, they should be discontinued early. 
 
Non-pharmacological therapies include: 
Physiotherapy (ice packs, heat, massage therapy), use of corsets/braces, 
acupuncture may be of benefit. 
Enrolment in a pain management programme which includes a clinical psychologist may be 
necessary for patients with chronic pain. 
 
 
IMAGING IN LOW BACK PAIN: 
Routine imaging should be avoided. This is a costly practice and exposes the patient to 
unnecessary radiation. 
 
Especially in acute LBP, x-rays may be unhelpful. The pain is often from soft tissues which 
are not visible on plain x-rays. Further, age-related degeneration is a common finding, even 
in asymptomatic patients, and may not represent the actual cause of the pain. 
Patients should be reassessed if the pain worsens or persists, or if neurological 
symptoms develop, and these patients should be investigated further. Surgery is 
appropriate for only a small proportion of patients. 
 
Quiz: At the end of these lectures you should be able to answer the following questions. 
  
NECK PAIN: 
A 45-year-old woman presents with neck pain for three weeks. The pain is worse on flexion of 
the neck and improves with rest and analgesia. 
 
1. Discuss common causes for acute and chronic neck pain. 
2. What features on history and examination can help to identify the cause of neck pain? 
3. What are the various imaging techniques available for this patient, and what information 
will each provide? 
4. Describe the anatomy of the spine with specific reference to the anatomical structures 
which may result in spinal pain. 
 


--- page 7 ---
  
LOWer BACK PAIN: 
A 55-year-old woman reports spinal pain in the lumbar area. The pain occurred suddenly as 
she bent forward. She has been taking prednisone for many years to treat her rheumatoid 
arthritis. 
 
1. What are the ‘red flags’ that should raise the alarm that further investigation of the 
patient’s low back pain is indicated? 
2. How would you counsel a patient who presents to you with low back pain? Include in 
your answer principles of management and drug / non-pharmacological therapy. 
3. Which patients who present with low back pain should be referred for imaging? 
4. What symptoms would suggest a neurologic cause for the back pain? 
  
  
 
