--- page 1 ---
So, in this lecture, we will be discussing an overview of connective tissue diseases,
which will include epidemiology, clinical features, investigations, and management.
So what are the connective tissue diseases?
The most well-known connective tissue disease or pathonomonic of the condition is systemic
lupus aerothermatosis.
More rare forms of connective tissue disease include systemic sclerosis or scleroderma,
endopathic inflammatory myositis, mixed connective tissue diseases, overlapped syndrome, and
undifferentiated connective tissue disease.
The systemic lupus aerothermatosis is a connective tissue disease, which is relatively more
common than the other conditions.
It has its own set of criteria with the ACR and the Euler criteria, which includes clinical
criteria as well as laboratory criteria.
Systemic sclerosis will also be discussed in the slides to come, and we will briefly
discuss classification criteria, clinical features, and management, and the same with
your idiopathic inflammatory myositis.
So systemic lupus involves skin manifestations, joint manifestations, hematological manifestations,
renal, and it can involve basically any system, but we will go through the common system
involvement in this common, clinical science that one would encounter on clinical examination
and laboratory examination.
Mixed connective tissue disease is a connective tissue disease entity on its own with its
own set of criteria, and it's often associated with a positive lab test or a positive U1RMP.
An overlap syndrome is when two or more connective tissue diseases coexist in the same individual.
For example, patients with SLE can also have scleroderma and rheumatoid arthritis, and
if they meet criteria for all of these individual connective tissue diseases.
An undifferentiated connective tissue disease, so this is a term that we use for connective
tissue diseases that do not fulfill any criteria set.
So one of the characteristics of autoimmune connective tissue diseases, and all the connective
--- page 2 ---
tissue diseases have certain similar characteristics.
So firstly, they have a multi-system involvement, so therefore good history and good clinical
examination, and a thorough workup is required due to the extensive system involvement in
these connective tissue diseases.
And with all connective tissue diseases, they are bound to be more common in women, and
estrogen is thought to play a role in the development of autoimmune connective tissue diseases.
Anti-history of autoimmune disorder, these tend to be positive, and autoimmune diseases
tend to occur more commonly within families.
They are associated characteristic autoantibodies, for example SLE is associated with anti-nuclear
factor, rheumatoid arthritis is associated with rheumatoid factor and anti-CCP, scleroderma
may be associated with specific scleroderma antibodies like your SCL, CMT and your anti-centromia
antibodies, and you also have multi-sitis specific antibodies.
So these antibodies can help us in the diagnosis and the management of these connective tissue
diseases.
The other characteristic of connective tissue diseases is that they respond to immunosuppressive
therapy, and these therapies include corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs, such as methotrexate,
azadiaprine, depending on the type of disease and the organ system that is involved.
They also may have a high morbidity and mortality if they are undiagnosed or inappropriately
treated.
So, let's look at systemic eupis erotematosis or SLE, and it is found to be more common
in women than men with the ratio of 3 is to 1, and the worldwide incidence ratio fluctuates
to about 1 is to 1,000 to 1 is to 10,000.
African-American, Hispanic Asians and Caucasians, there's a greater prevalence amongst the
African-American and Hispanic than Asians and then Caucasians.
The age of onset usually affects younger adults, and the age of onset is generally between
15 to 45 years.
However, there's very little data from sub-Saharan Africa, and a lot of our data is extrapolated
--- page 3 ---
from population groups in other countries, and it has been found that there's similar
patterns with higher rates in Africans.
The manifestations are varied from mild to moderate to life threatening disease, and an
individual may start up with mild disease and may progress to moderate or severe disease,
or may remain mild with mild disease for the rest of their lives.
So, the phenotype of the disease may vary from individual to individual.
The risk factors, so, if they are familial risk factors as well as environmental risk
factors, let me predispose one to the development of SLE.
So, what are the clinical features of SLE?
So, most commonly, patients would present with a severe constitutional illness, which
are involved fatigue, fever, atrialgia, or weight changes, renoids, which is bluish
discolidation of the tips of the fingers in response to stresses or cold weather, may
be seen in patients with SLE, and they may also present with sicker symptoms.
Sicker symptoms is basically dry eyes and dry mouth, and this may be associated with
a secondary show-girls earth syndrome.
They may also have muscular skeletal manifestations, and present with atrialgia, atropathy, which
includes arthritis, myelgia, myositis, or frank arthritis.
So, dermatological manifestations, there's a vast number of dermatological manifestations
associated with SLE, but the pathonomonic feature of SLE is a butterfly or male rash.
However, not every patient will present with this sign, and only about 40% of patients
may have the clinical manifestation.
The other feature is that of photosensitivity, and other types of rash, such as a discoid
lupus rash, alopecia as well, which is generally non-scary.
Renal manifestations may include nephratic syndrome and ephratic syndrome, but most
commonly edema change in a urinary sediment and hypertension.
Neuropsychiatric manifestations, there are various, a large number of neuropsychiatric
syndromes associated with SLE.
--- page 4 ---
The most common neurological signs is headaches, seizures.
Patients may also present with psychosis and mood changes.
Pominity or cardiovascular involvement may include dyspnea and pulmonary edema, gastrointestinal,
nausea, dyspepci and abdominal pain, and various hematological abnormalities that may include
bruising recurrent infections or bruising related to low platelet counts, recurrent
infections due to low white cell count, fatigue due to anemia, and thrombosis as well with
abnormal phospholipid proteins may be associated with SLE.
With regards to an obstetric history, this may affect parity, it may cause miscarriages,
and oral contraception and hormone replacement therapy may predispose patients with SLE to
development of thrombosis.
And then family history is also found to be important in the autoimmune diseases.
So if a patient has a family member with an autoimmune disease, then they are likely to
have the same or a different type of autoimmune disease.
So these pictures basically show us the common clinical features of SLE, and these include
your oral ulcers, and these are usually painless oral ulcers, and this is a patient with ulcers
on the heart pellet, photosensitive rash that spares the folds, the joint folds, and
then a male rash involving the male area of the face with sparing of the nasolabial fold.
Okay, and this is another skin manifestation.
This was the subrocute cutaneous lupus with a diffuse eruption of the dermatitis related
to SLE, and this shows a bullish eruption, okay, with bullish lesions involving the skin,
and with alopecia as well.
So what are the diagnostic investigations or important investigations that can help us
to make a diagnosis of SLE?
So SLE is associated with the anti-nuclear factor, and this is done under indirect immunofluorescence
and a HEP2 cells dilution.
So on the anti-nuclear antibody screen, which is the ANA, the ANF is actually a HEP2 cells
in dilution, and it is generally reported in a teeter of 1 is to 80, 1 is to 160, 1
--- page 5 ---
is to 320, and so forth.
ANA is positive because more than 10% of the population can have A. So a teeter of 1 is
to 160 is considered a positive teeter because more than 10% of the population can have A,
so teeter positivity and not necessarily have SLE.
Staining patterns will help us also make a diagnosis because other connective tissue
diseases like scleroderma may also be associated with the positive ANA.
However, the staining pattern, for example, that is more specific for SLE would be a peripheral
origin pattern or a speckled pattern, 90% of SLE patients would have, 98% of SLE patients
will have elevated serum levels of ANA, and a very small percentage of 5% or less of people
would have A, with the positive ANA actually do have SLE.
So you can have a positive ANA, but in order to make a diagnosis of SLE, you must have
the clinical manifestations in keeping with the SLE.
Okay, so this table is a bit crowded and a bit cramped, but it is a good illustration
of, it tabulates the autoantibodies in SLE and some of their clinical associations, and
this is taken from Harrison's textbook of medicine, and basically shows you the double
standard DNA, for example, what their clinical association is.
So double standard DNA is more specific for SLE, it has a high diagnostic specificity
for SLE, unlike your anti-nuclear factor, it's correlates with the disease activity, especially
activity of nupis nephritis, and the frequency is 50 to 70%.
Other antibodies such as anti-histone, antibody, anti-smooth, anti-histone, anti-bodies, present
in patients who may have a drug-induced nupis, anti-smooth also has high diagnostic specificity
of SLE.
And then other antibodies that are reported on your anti-nuclear antibody screen include
your UNRNP, which will be positive in mixed-connective tissue disease, overlap syndrome, your Rho,
SSA, NAR, SSB, antibodies, which would be positive in neonatal lupus, and also in shogren syndrome,
ribosomal P antibodies, which may be positive in individuals who have psychiatric disease
or neurolupus, and then phospholipid antibodies as well, are beaded to glycoprotein that may
--- page 6 ---
be present in patients who have secondary anti-phospholipid syndrome associated with
lupus.
So this is the slick classification criteria for SLE.
Now the slick classification criteria is an older set of criteria.
However, it may still be used in clinical practice as the clinical and immunological
criteria are clearly set out and can help us when we have a patient with these clinical
manifestations and it can help us classify and also diagnose SLE in the clinical setting.
So the requirements is that more than equal to four criteria, at least one clinical and
one lab criteria or biopsy-proven lupus nephritis with a positive ANA or a positive.
Okay, so just to repeat that, in terms of the requirements, it's more than equal to
four criteria, and of these four criteria, at least one must be a clinical criteria and
one must be the lab criteria, and this is these clinical and laboratory criteria are listed
below, or even individual has lupus nephritis on a biopsy.
You just need a positive ANF or a positive DNA to make a diagnosis of SLE.
Now when we look at the clinical criteria, as part of the slick B11 criteria listed below,
as well as the six immunological criteria, and you can see that cutaneous lesions are
arthritis, serocytous, renal involvement, neurological, hematological, including leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
included in your clinical criteria, your immunological criteria is your ANA, DNA, Smith, phospholipidantibodies,
your low C3, C4, the direct combs test that may be positive in the presence of, in the absence
of hemolytic anemia.
So the relatively New York ACR and Euloc criteria for classification of SLE is also useful,
and all patients classified as having SLE must have a serum teeter, ANA of at least one
is 280 on the hip two cells, okay?
And this criteria is a little bit different in that it awaits, it assigns a point to different
clinical domains, and these points are weighted according to the degree of severity or the
degree of specificity for SLE.
For example, constitutional domain includes fever, which is given two points.
--- page 7 ---
So if an individual has 10 or more points, they can be classified as having SLE.
And if you look at the cutaneous for a lupus, okay, so if there's acute cutaneous lupus,
this is awarded six points, arthritis is awarded six points, a neurological domain,
if the patient has seizures, psychosis, or delirium, they are allocated a certain number
of points.
Remember that you take the highest point from each domain, and you add all the points up.
And then in the immunological criteria, you can see the highest points are allocated to
double-stranded DNA and anti-smith antibodies, which are given six each in the immunological
domain.
With regards to investigations, so blood investigations, urine examination, and the
radiological investigations as well as ultrasound and CT scans, depending on the clinical presentation
of the individual, okay?
So urine lipstick is very important in every patient with suspected SLE to look for an
active urinary sediment.
And if the patient does have an active urinary sediment protein, this would indicate that
that patient requires the investigation of the testing for lupus nephritis.
In regards to a full blood count, a hemoglobin may show anemia, and if there is anemia, one
has to investigate for a possible hemolytic anemia with a combs test, LDA, a peripheral
smear, looking at the blood, blood, and as well.
On the full blood count, the white cell count is important, so always ask for a differential
on the white cell count, looking for lymphopenia, neutropenia particularly.
It's extremely common and is one of the clinical features of SLE.
Thrombocytopenia may be very severe and may have a higher risk of morbidity, so it's
important to identify thrombocytopenia and treat it as soon as possible.
It's important to do a liver function test, to look for autoimmune hepatitis, but also
to look for baseline liver function tests, because remember, these patients are most likely
going to be taking toxic medications, and you want to make sure that their liver function
--- page 8 ---
at baseline is normal.
A UN is also important, looking for petals of renal impairment, and then of course if
you have protein positive on the dipstick, you'd want to send off a spot urine sample
or a urine protein creatinine ratio to quantify the protein.
If you suspect an infection, then send off a urine MCNS to exclude an infection and
to treat the infection.
With regards to x-rays of the joints, SLE generally results in a non-erosive arthritis,
so you will see no erosions on the x-rays, but you may see a bit of gestural arctic
loss to peanut, and ultrasound kidneys is important, especially if you are planning a
biopsy and to exclude obstructive causes of the reverb pathology, and a CT scan may
be indicated as well if there are any abnormalities on the other radiographic investigations.
HR CT of the chest may be done, or high resolution CT scan of the chest may be done if one suspects
interstitial lung disease.
And then on the right, these are all the investigations that one would do for a humanitic
email, which includes a combs, LDH smear, one would want to do iron studies.
Compliments are imported activity markers, or C3, C4, at times when this flare of lupus
helps us to diagnose a flare.
First, lipid antibodies include three antibody tests, anti-cudulepine, which is the ACA.
The LA is your lupus anticoagulant, the BGP1 is your beta-2 glycoprotein.
It's important to always do a thyroid function test, as autoimmune thyroiditis often occurs
in patients with lupus, and then of course other autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid
factor anti-CCP, in association with rheumatoid arthritis, vasculitis for ankle associated
vasculities, may coexist with lupus, or may occur in its own, or must be excluded, and
then viral screening is important as well as an RPR.
The live program in HPO A1C should be done on all patients as a baseline and then on
follow-up, because patients have a risk of accelerated atherosclerosis and earlier on
set up cardiovascular disease.
--- page 9 ---
So the management depends on the disease severity and the organ involvement.
It requires a multi-disciplinary approach, including physiotherapy, social work, etc.
Initial treatment includes the use of glucocorticoids, and specific immunosuppressant drugs may
be required, and such as hydroxychloroquine, and almost every patient that is diagnosed
with lupus should be commenced on hydroxychloroquine, provided that there are no side effects
and no predisposing factors that would prevent one from taking plasma quin, bicofenlate,
morphotil, cyclophosphamide, and azotyoprene.
Okay, this table as well is very crowded as well, but it's a good table that just lets
the immunosuppressants use in SLE, their indications, their doses, the important adverse
effects and monitoring.
Okay, and this table is then continued as well, and then this looks at the complications
and comorbidities in SLE, prevention and therapy, okay.
So the most important comorbidity in SLE and most connective tissue disease is infection,
and often trying to differentiate a flare from an infection can be very taxing, and trying
to treat an infection in the presence of a lupus flare can also be very challenging
and frustrating as well.
So bacterial and opportunistic respiratory tract infections commonly occur in the setting
of connective tissue diseases and lupus due to impaired immune system, and associations
may also be due to the association of an infection, and an increased risk of infection
may be secondary to the use of corticosteroids and disease activity as well as the use of
immunosuppressants.
Preventative therapy would include the five-year immunococcal vaccine and influenza vaccine
every year, vigilance by the patient and the health care team, and careful treatment of
infections and identification of infections is important.
TB should always be a consideration when a patient with an autoimmune disease presents
with respiratory symptoms, fever, and constitutional symptoms, as most of these patients are corticosteroids,
which suppresses the immune system, and then of course looking out for accelerated atherosclerosis
--- page 10 ---
and cardiovascular disease is important, treating hypertension and hypertension that
may be related to corticosteroid use and nephritis as well as treating dyslipidemia is important.
Corticosteroid induced diabetes mellitus is common, and therefore one should try and use
corticosteroids as bridging therapy and reduce and stop corticosteroids as soon as possible
to prevent the development of diabetes.
Osteoporosis as well may also be related to the use of corticosteroids.
A vasculinochrosis may sometimes be associated with the autoimmune disease itself, but commonly
secondary to the use of corticosteroids, phospholipid antibodies as well, and these patients
often require hip replacement surgery.
You try and cervical cancer related to the use of cyclophosphamide, and it's important
for patients, femur patients to receive HPV vaccines to get their annual pap smears,
and then of course there's a higher risk of lymphoma, it's threefold increase in the
presence of SLE, so one should always have a high index of suspicion if a patient presents
with, signs and symptoms suggest a bottom forma.
Then there's other connective tissue disease that may occur secondary to SLE or as a primary
condition is anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome, and this connective tissue disease is associated
with venous thrombosis, arterial thrombosis, bed obstetric history which includes recurrent
miscarriages, thrombocytopenia and skin manifestations such as libido reticularis.
In the APLS diagnostic criteria, there's clinical criteria as well as laboratory criteria, and
the clinical criteria basically, the first one that is listed is a vasculidrombosis,
so greater than one arterial venous or small vessel thrombosis, and then preg