--- page 11 ---
nancy morbidity.
There's three different manifestations that may be included in the clinical criteria,
so the first one is a fetal death at or beyond the 10th week of gestation, so more than 10
weeks gestation, if there's a miscarriage of fetal loss, if there's a premature birth,
then or before the 34th week of gestation, and then if there's severe, that is not due
to severe preeclampsia of presentar insufficiency, and then the third one if the patient has more
than equal to three consecutive first trimester or before the 10th week of gestation and miscarriages.
The lab criteria includes a lupus anticoagulant which is positive on more than two occasions,
taken 12 weeks apart, so lupus anticoagulant, anticoagulopin, and beta-2 glycoprotein,
are the three antibodies that are tested, however all three of them, if they are positive,
they need to be repeated 12 weeks later, so two positive antibody tests plus one clinical criteria
makes the diagnosis or classification of antifospholipid antibody syndrome as definite.
So antifospholipid antibody syndrome may be primary or secondary, it occurs in about 30 to 50%
of SLE patients, the diagnosis is made on a false positive VDR L test, anticoagulopin antibodies,
lupus anticoagulant and beta-2 glycoprotein tests, and we went through the diagnostic criteria of the previous slide.
Antifospholipid syndrome can possibly affect multiple organ systems and result in a catastrophic
phospholipid syndrome, and these manifestations include cardiovascular manifestations which may
result in cerebrovascular accidents, sinus thrombosis, cardiac velvealopathy, or myocardial infarction.
The dermatological manifestations that is pathinomonic of antifospholipid syndrome is libido reticularis,
which is a netlac rash that may be present on the thighs or in the aspect of the thighs or in the aspect of the arms.
So furthermore, patients with phospholipid may present with perpura or infarx or ulceration involving the skin.
Thrombocytopenia, hemalitic anemia, arterial or venous thrombembolic disease are the common hematological manifestations.
Patients may have a vascular necrosis of the bone or add other infarctions or hemorrhage.
Neurological manifestations may include a stroke, TIA's and cognitive dysfunction,
--- page 12 ---
and in obstetric manifestations we discussed in the previous slide, they may have oculotrombosis,
pulmonary embolus, and pulmonary hypertension.
This is a picture showing libido reticularis or a netlac rash involving the thighs of a patient with phospholipid syndrome.
So now we've come to the discussion on sclerodama or diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis.
Sclerodama is still relatively rare, and like all the other connective tissue diseases,
it still has a higher female preponderance, and the epidemiology basically it may be related to
certain occupations and exposure to certain chemicals and certain chemical agents and certain drugs.
However, most cases are duopathic and there may be a genetic predisposition as well.
The clinical presentation involves thickening of the skin, which may either be limited or diffuse,
and the other aspect of the sclerodama is a vascular fatigue.
So we have the skin manifestations, which involves thickening or tightening of the skin,
which may be generalized over the entire body, initially starting up in the hands and feet,
and the distal structures, and then moving proximally.
And in addition to that vascular fatigue, in the way of renoids with digital ulcers,
with the larger vessel vascular pertheses as well that the patient may present with.
So who gets sclerodama?
Okay, so sclerodama can occur at any age. However, the peak age of onset is thought to be 35
to 64 years of age. The female is to male ratio is high, it's 4 is to 1, and it occurs in around
30 persons per million population per year, so still a relatively rare disease.
It's estimated that 125,000 active cases were found in the United States.
It occurs at a younger age in African-American women, in comparison to
European-American women, and it's more likely to be a diffuse, crutaneous systemic sclerosis.
The highest incidence is thought to be found in the Chokwata Native Americans, and residing in
Oklahoma, and they have the highest reported disease incidence.
--- page 13 ---
Okay, this is a diagram also taken from Harrison's internal medicine textbook,
and it basically illustrates the pathogenic processes involved in sclerodama.
And as I mentioned before, the pathogenesis involves a vascular fatigue as well as a fibrotic
process or a tissue fibrosis. So if there is an etiological agent or a genetic predisposition,
then there is abnormalities in the endothelial cell and there's vascular alterations.
And this results in chronic inflammation, resulting in the fibrocytes and the myofibroblast,
and this proliferation of these cells, and which also affects the endothelial cells as well.
And results, and this then results in a vascular fatigue as well as tissue fibrosis.
The key characteristics, as I mentioned previously, is skin thickening and Reynolds
phenomenon. And most patients will have a suffragil reflex or a suffragil dysmotility,
and more than 90% will have an anti-nuclear antibody positive test.
Classification of sclerodama, it may be classified into localized or diffuse sclerodama,
and the diffuse, so localized, generalized sclerodama, so localized is your mophia,
and it is not associated with systemic manifestations.
Your generalized sclerodama has systemic manifestations and is referred to as systemic sclerosis,
and that is further divided into diffuse,
cutaneous systemic sclerosis and limited, cutaneous systemic sclerosis.
And there's a small percentage of patients who may have systemic sclerosis without sclerodama,
or thickening of the skin.
So this basically depicts the skin involvement in limited and diffuse.
So in limited sclerodama, this skin thickening or skin tightening distal to the elbows and distal
to the knees, whereas in diffuse, the skin tightening is proximal to the elbows, proximal
to the knees, and may involve the trunk as well. Limited may also involve the face,
as well as diffuse may also involve the face.
--- page 14 ---
Typing of the skin, so skin changes, there's three phases of changes that involve the skin.
First, the early phase is the ademitous phase, then there's the inducible phase with skin
thickening, and then lastly, there is the atrophic phase with the development of contractures and
the loss of hair and other skin appendages.
This shows a patient with sclerodama who has a dema of the hands, and you can see this shiny
tightening of the digits with sclerodactyl.
This is an individual on the left who with the digital ulcers, you can see there's severe
digital ulcers on the extensive surfaces of the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints.
There's sclerodactyl with the tightening of the skin.
There's acro osteolysis as well, involving the second digit on the right hand,
and you can see that there's Reynolds phenomenon with pulp at chippy as well.
The hands on the right shows a Reynolds, you can see that the dusky, blueish appearance,
the white changes, and then the red changes, so there's three color changes seen in these fingers,
typical of Reynolds phenomenon. This picture basically shows your contractures, your skin
changes in an individual with sclerodama.
So the skin changes, sclerodactyl is tightening of the skin distal to the MCPs.
Facial change in the facial expression, because of the tightening of the skin over the face,
patients will have an expressionless face with pursed lips and reduced oral aperture or
microstomia. Other skin changes include hyper or hyperpigmentation of the skin or
assault and paper rash, telangiectasia, which is spider like vessels that may be found on the
lips, on the buccomucosa of the chest and the face, which are the most common areas of the
telangiectasia, and calcinosis, which are calcific deposits, which may be found in the
subcutaneous tissue. This is a picture of an individual with puckering of the lips,
pursing of the lips with a beak-like nose and tightening of the skin over the face,
--- page 15 ---
and this is another individual with the bird-like faces, beaking reduced oral aperture,
tightening of the skin as well as assault and paper rash.
This further shows a patient with scleroderma with pursing of the lips of some telangiectasia,
reduced oral aperture, so less than two fingers can fit in the mouth, in individual with
microstomia, telangiectasia on the lips, telangiectasia on the tongue and the lips there as well,
and then telangiectasia involving the mucosa of the mouth.
This is an x-ray that shows sheets of calcinosis, and this may be found in
patients with scleroderma, as well as children with juvenile dermatomyocytes,
so you can see the sheets of calcinosis, and this can be palpated as well on examination.
Raynot's phenomenon is an important feature of scleroderma, and almost every patient who has
scleroderma will have Raynot's phenomenon, and it is generally your secondary Raynot's
phenomenon. It may be divided into primary and secondary, and primary is not always pathological,
it affects four to 15% of the population, the female to male ratio is 20 is to one,
and in order to make a diagnosis of Raynot's, you should have a tri-basic color response,
white, blue, and then red, and ischemic damage is rare in the primary, and the management is
basically symptomatic or conservative measures to prevent exposure to cold, and one may want to
use that European for management of your Raynot's phenomenon. The secondary Raynot's is associated
with a connective tissue disease, and generally the onset of the Raynot's occurs within two years
of onset of the connective tissue disease, and you may have positive antibodies associated with
it, as well as other features of connective tissue disease. And secondary Raynot's is often
associated with abnormal, nailed-fold, capillary changes, and digital oscillation.
Okay, so this picture shows your digital putting in a patient with Raynot's, as well as the
dusky blue discoloration in an individual with Raynot's.
It also shows you the digital ulcers and the digital putting,
--- page 16 ---
and the prevalence of Raynot's, in limited scleroderma, Raynot's is present in 100% of patients.
In diffuse scleroderma, 70 to 80% of patients would have Raynot's, and in SLE, 20 to 45% of
patients may have Raynot's. This is the ACR Euler criteria for the classification of systemic
sclerosis of scleroderma. It takes into account skin changes, and the criteria are not applicable
to patients with skin tightening, sparing the fingers, or to patients who have scleroderma
like disorder. That better explains their manifestations. So you should have nine or more points to make
diagnosis or to be classified as having definite scleroderma. The sensitivity of this classification
criteria is 91% with a 92% specificity.
And then just a comparison of organ system involvement in diffuse and limited scleroderma.
So diffuse, so 100% of patients with diffuse would have skin thickening.
95% of limited would have a skin thickening. And diffuse,
clangiectasia as well as arthralgias or arthritis. So clangiectasia is more common in limited scleroderma.
And Raynot's phenomenon is more common in present in almost 95 to 100% of limited,
and 85 to 95% of limited. Tendon friction drops is more common in diffuse scleroderma,
and pulmonary fibrosis may occur in both, but up to 59% of patients with diffuse.
The disease progression, so with regards to limited and diffuse. So with the diffuse scleroderma,
this Raynot's progressive skin thickening and friction drops, gastrointestinal
involvement arthritis fatigue may occur within the first one to 12 months of the
diagnosis of scleroderma. And this is associated, diffuse is associated with positive SCL 70 antibodies
and a positive nuclear antibody. Then looking at other manifestations, so one should screen for
internal organ involvement in systemic sclerosis, looking for pulmonary hypertension, lung fibrosis,
renal involvement, cardiac disease, and gastrointestinal symptoms.
Management involves keeping warm using gloves or socks, stopping smoking, using vasodilators
such as calcium channel blockers, nephoeidopine, dultyesum and amylondepine. The dose of these
--- page 17 ---
drugs is increased until the desired effect is obtained or stopped if they're all limited,
if they're side effects. Anti-adrenergic agents such as plazasin, doxazasin,
mita, dulpendrosopine, and ACE inhibitors are less effective than calcium channel blockers.
Arbs or angiotensin receptor blockers such as lusartin, lusartin, or bisartin have also shown
relatively good results. Topical nitroglycerin ointment may be applied sparingly over the affected
areas if the patients have renods with digital oxidation that are very painful and this can be
applied for 20 minutes three times a day. And may result in headaches. One of the side effects
of the nitroglycerin may be headaches. A half an aspirin a day may be beneficial to inhibit
platelet activation and this is often recommended in patients with renods.
Okay then moving on to your idiopatic inflammatory myositis. The annual incidence is 2 to 10 cases
per million so it's still relatively rare disease. The peak age of onset is a bi-modal
intermatomyositis. There's one peak at 5 to 15 years of age and the other 45 to 65 years of age.
Polymyositis is rare less than 15 years with the mean age of onset between 50 to 60 years of age.
The female to male ratio is 2 to 3 is to 1 so also predominantly females are affected by this
disease. And in the United States African Americans have a greater incidence of myositis than co-occasions.
The clinical presentation so most commonly patients who present with signs and symptoms of
proximal muscle weakness involving the shoulder girdle and the hip girdle. So they will complain
of difficulty standing and calming their hair and the proximal muscles in of the shoulder or the
pelvis are usually weak so they have difficulty rising from a seated position walking upstairs and
raising their arms above their head. They may also present with neck flexion weakness.
Muscle pain may be present in about 50% of patients as well as sometimes associated with
muscle edema or swelling and skin rashes include heliotropresh and gut transpatches if the patient
has a dermatomyositis. So one of the skin manifestations of dermatomyositis and these include a heliotropresh.
This is a vilacious rash that involves the peri-orbital area, gut transpapules which is found on the
--- page 18 ---
extensor surfaces. These are so very scaley lesions found on the extensor surfaces of the
joints, the PIP, MCP and sometimes elbow joints. V-sign which is the hyperpigmented photosensitive
rash in the V of the neck, short sign this rash then involves the shoulders and proximal arms,
holster sign is rash involving the lateral aspect of the thighs and then mechanics hands as well is
a feature of dermatomyositis where you have thickening, fissuring and cracking of the skin of the
finger pads particularly on the radial side of the index finger and this may be associated with
anti-synthetase antibody positivity, more commonly seen in polymyositis than dematomyositis and
this may be associated with the anti-synthetase syndrome. Nearfold abnormalities so one may see
peri-ungorytema and hypertrophy are dilated capillary loops as well. Subcutaneous calcification
particularly may be seen in juvenile dematomyositis. This is a picture of a heliotrop
troprash as you can see there's this pigmented vilacious looking rash in the peri-orbital region
in a patient with dematomyositis. This is a B sign with this rash involving the V of the neck,
guttons papules involving the MCP's PIP joints and then further heliotrop rash around the eyes
in a female Caucasian patient. Classification criteria of idiopatic myositis involves polymyositis
dematomyositis, inclusion body myositis, myositis associated with connective tissue diseases
and myositis associated with malignancy.
One of the characteristic features of polymyositis so firstly an elevate so proximal muscle weakness
that's in limb-girdle muscles and anti-genic flexor muscle weakness. Elevation of your creatinine
kinase muscle biopsy evidence that is typical of myositis and abnormal EMG findings which is
in keeping of myositis. Extra muscular features may also be present in association with idiopatic
inflammatory myopathies so always have a high index of suspicion for underlying malignancies
and particularly in your older age individuals with dematomyositis and malignancy screening
is important. Skin manifestations that may be typical of dematomyositis look for subcutaneous
calcifications, look for lung involvement and interstitial lung disease that may be associated
--- page 19 ---
with anti-synthetase syndrome or major stokine isolation or suffragil dysmotility as well.
Exclude other causes so idiopatic inflammatory myopathies are rare conditions so if a patient
presents with proximal muscle weakness it's important to have an approach to proximal muscle
weakness and to exclude other causes such as drug and toxin-induced myopathies, neuromuscular
disorders, endocrine disorders, sarcoidosis, rheumatic disorders, infections,
metabolic myopathies as well and one of the more common metabolic abnormalities is hypokalemia
so please check for potassium levels in an individual who's presenting with proximal muscle weakness
because this can be easily replaced and rectified.
Okay so the 2017 Euler ACI diagnostic criteria for idiopatic inflammatory myositis
looked at the following variables, it looked at age of onset and there's a bimodal peak of onset
18 to 40 and then more than 40 years. The clinical muscle variables is upper extremities,
lower extremities and near flexor weakness, the skin variables, the clinical variable,
other clinical variables may include dysphagia or suffragil dysmotility,
laboratory variables is your elevated CK, LDH, AST, ART and anti-jaw antibody positivity,
muscle baropsy may show endomycel, pyramycel, infiltrate, peripasiculae atrophy and room
evacules in the case of inclusion body myositis.
Then you also have the bohannin pleater classification criteria which is a relatively
simple classification criteria and may assist an individual in making a diagnosis.
And then the further subtypes that may not be included in the bohannin pleater classification
and but is included in your classification criteria. So the new classification includes
the metomyositis, polymyositis, inclusion body myositis, immune mediating, necrotizing myopathy,
aim myopathic dermatomyositis, antisynthetic syndrome, overlap myositis, cancer-associated
myositis and juvenile dermatomyositis.
And then furthermore, looking at the myositis specific antibodies so for dermatomyositis,
--- page 20 ---
an anti-MI2 antibody is most commonly found in the metomyositis, an anti-signal recognition
peptide or SRP antibody, necrotizing myositis and antisynthetic syndrome
and polymyositis may be associated with the anti-J0-1 antibody.
Drug management, so this basically shows an upset upside-down pyramid in terms of
treatment which involves corticosteroids, steroid-sparing agents and then treatment of refactory disease.
So a large proportion of patients may respond alone to corticosteroid therapy but would then
go on to require steroid-sparing agent and a smaller proportion would have refractory disease.
Okay, so lastly, just a little bit on mixed connective tissue disease. Remember we said
that mixed connective tissue disease is an autoimmune disease on its own with its own
set of criteria. The Alachon-Segovia diagnostic criteria include serological criteria as well
as clinical criteria. One must have an anti-U1-RNP antibody positive in a high
tutor together with the presence of clinical criteria and these include edema of the hands,
sinovitis, myositis, renods and acrosclerosis. Remember, the presence of U1 and RNP antibody
in the absence of clinical criteria does not make the diagnosis of MCTD.
Thank you and that's the end of our lecture on connective tissue diseases.
