--- page 1 ---
Hello everybody, I'm Dr. Vinder from the Department of Anthropology. During this session
I will be discussing God. So God is known as a disease of kings, mainly because of the
modified risk factors that are associated with it, with its onset and exacerbation.
And it came off diseases because of the symptoms, mainly pain that patients often experience,
which is base of hair. So God is a form of the immunociraptoritis, which is caused by
the possession of monosolium use in eureic crystals in their active blood and periodic
lesions. His MSU shedding in a joint leads to recurring episode and recurring immunociraptoritis.
So the concentration above the solubulium of urate is defined as hypoecinia. And the
clinical consequences of this include acute eureic acid stones, as well as nephrophothesy.
The causes of hypoecinia may be primary, where they are genetic predisposition or second
degree, where there is either upper production of urate acid or under-extrician acrylic acid.
And under-extrician is the main cause of hypoecinia. So God is a commonest form of the
immunociraptoritis in men, with the male to female ratio of 2 to 4, is to men in Caucasian
and egg 8 is to men in Asian, with the peak age of 40 to 50 years. It's very rare in males
--- page 2 ---
below age 30, children in a pain and a causal woman. You're not everyone with hypoecinia
and developed God. So urate acid comes from protein-baked dye. So from protein, you've
got nucleic acid and this nucleic acid, like adenin, adenin, are converted to hypozyme
bine and hypozyme bangers in bine. And then they leave acid and they start in those, the
enzyme that is involved, which is cyanoxidase, which is where the urecular therapy act is.
And then the urecular case, which is where some other medications also act and will work.
So in human or humans, we often, we actually, this process whereby the urecular acid can
be converted to alentine is not present. So anyone would convert cyanoxidine to urecular
acid and this ends here. And this urecular acid is not soluble, but alentine is soluble.
So when we give medications, we often, in targeting this, we often give somebody medication
that can actually catalyze this process whereby the urecular acid can be converted
to alentine. So in human and at the higher primate, the urecular oxidase, which is uric,
ureicase enlaxes, a hepatic enzyme is inactive due to a man's sense mutation. And any one
of that possesses ureicase or any one of that possess ureicase transformed ureic acid into
--- page 3 ---
more soluble form of acid, and they can eliminate this. So ureic acid, with the weight of the
amount of ureic, in the body, is the natural result of the amount produced and the amount
is treated with approximately 60% of the day to 10 or above. So majority is excretive
by the kidneys, and then there is that ureicase lysis that happens in the gut. And the causes
of hyposynia, which is one, like I said, of a production can be related to high-furin-fueled
food. Many can use the molasses, psoriasis, and cytotoxic drugs. And then the under-extrication
is the cause of alcohol, any venal disease, hypertension, and then drugs, which include
diatrix, presenamide, thambiental. And these are most common drugs that can be used in
sexual sporein, which can be used by dermatology commonly, and sometimes we know our nephrology,
and then blood docensality. And there is an association between ureic acid and metabolic
cymbal, and the metabolic cymbal in the case where there's lucity, hypertension, hypotryic
glycerodemia, cholesterol diseases, and diabetes. And with the reduction in ureic clearance,
interstitial tofi, general cholesterol, potential, and alcohol in diabetes. So the consequences of
hyposynia, a patient may be asymptomatic, or they may develop actual drugs as you've said,
--- page 4 ---
they can have tofi, reg acid in the ureic neuropathy. Only a small number of people develop a
gut. And the risk of the risk of nephrolucleus, this is very low in these patients with asymptomatic
hyposynia, and the risk of illness of the nutrients is low, and correct hyposynia is what is important
if that is possible. And you just need to monitor the patient's serineadone need to start,
no treatment is required. So if a patient has got asymptomatic hyposynia, they can develop
asymptomatic hyposynia with asymptomatic ureic, modern of sodium, red crystals, deposition,
and this can lead to nucleophiles and chronic topophages, and this can go the other way too.
So if someone's got acute gut, this is very dramatic offering. Patients often present with
a certain onset of the inflammation, but lastly, the risk is maximum within 12 for the 8 hours,
in terms of pain, but they have signs of accurate inflammation, and this can do it
asymptomatic, or it's often present with celitis, and it is all completely 5 to 10 days of treatment.
And joint involvement in either non-atticulae, and about 8% of the patients in the first attack,
lower limbs are clearly affected, 50% have the first metatarsal or entropy
joint involvement. Quality-atticulae is often seen in patients that are L-old,
--- page 5 ---
using diatics with generalized surfaces and females, and ureic level may be normal during
life with accurate attack. So if you often rely on history and examination,
and if ureic acid is normal, it doesn't exclude, or it doesn't mean that the patient doesn't have
gut or acute gut. So this is how the patient may often present, and also for the menus involved
that, as you can see, the menus is red, and so blue, and if well, most likely warm, and tender.
The elbow as well, and you have to differentiate these from this
tall thigh from a humanoid nose. And then the gut, the flare is striking,
it's a tussle, which has a lukemosis, and very painful, and you can see here,
and the tussle bones, or knee to foot, can also be seen, especially in the knee.
And then chronic to patient's gut, this is a widespread deposition of lute, and joints tendon,
bicep and catalage from bones, as you've said, tall thigh develop in about 10 years,
in your case, when hyperusemia is in undiagnosed, and treated, or an adequate stratification,
is less without knowing without treatment. And then presenting my first station in elderly woman,
undirolatics, and may damage bones and joints, may be inflamed,
--- page 6 ---
and aspirate or discharge choking material resendable parts.
And this is how this tall thigh look like, in the electric hand grab material.
You can also be seen in the ears, and then the x-rays, you can see that those beauge,
like they are beaten at the bones, in the destruction of the bone as well, the first entity.
So what do you know of this is, as you've said, the patient may have nephronidiasis,
which may precede the clinical count, risk-related to the level of very acid,
or risk-related to the aerobic acid in urechosuria, and factors favouring stone production are
you now know the field of acid, dehydration, reduced urine, volume, and reduced pH. The second
is chronic lymph acid nephropathy. The third is acute lymph acid nephropathy, also called
cumulitis syndrome, and this is due to massive or production of photovacicure and chemotherapy.
Because excising factors include trauma, infection, and surgery.
In the investigations, that should be done. The patient with gut is suspected culture.
You should sit and read an acid, sit and move off the field, and there's a sufficient head
fusion to the herbaceous material. That should be examined, and to inform our own
--- page 7 ---
aerobic acid, renal function should be checked, because again, of the complication and the
effect that medication that can be used, extruded by a kidney and screening for associated conditions
that have been decided, tension, basically to avoid some of them, then you have to give the x-rays.
So the definitive lab music is made by a demonstration of your acid crystals,
monosodematic crystals in the small world, blood, or similar blood tissue. We fluidly vary,
but the more apparent fluid is, the more likely that there's actually sepsis,
so that it can range from being re-sparled to just being
empowered, clear, as a effect most of the time is empty.
The menus motor fibrosine and gut asymptomatic patients are, like you said, you have to
you have to monitor patients seriously, don't treat, or there's not a treatment that is required,
but you have to quote a person like this, possible, and then there's acute management
and long-term use. And if you have a patient with asymptomatic hypoxemia, it's basically what I've said.
Then the acute count is using n-safe, but this has to be used in caution and altitude,
active ulcers, and avoiding patient with general insufficiency. Then you can use
--- page 8 ---
couchesum, one leg and step, then look in five milligrams after two hours, and then
look in five milligrams twice a day, tell this result, and then the cortical circuits interact
with each other if they're single-term-important, or if you're trying to send these joints after
communication, and you use both open five milligrams to cage up a day, five to ten days, if you are
losing all of all medication, or 2.5 milligrams, I mean, two to five days for four of those,
at four doors, then take her over seven to ten days, that's when you're losing ten days on.
And we often lose, but then you can do the same to ten days.
Then you can use intermastrolytic
mitral as well, which is the same as the outstealth, and for patients who are prefecture,
who can move in silicon-only inhibitors, who can have so far patients with n-safe,
couchesum, and cozopofstealth, that's a cute. And then the ureluorine peripachute
not being satisfied during the acute attack because of the chemo-wesson,
or prolonged acute attack. If the patient is related on ureluorine therapy,
you can continue, and you avoid rectifractuation, and you can sit down very quickly.
--- page 9 ---
So the long-term management include patient's education, diet, obesity, alcohol, and modified
therapy. Long-term, prophylactic therapies, n-safe, use couchesum for three to six months,
one to three acid levels normal, and low-dose couchesum can continue for six months,
or until the ureluorine peripachute level also returns to normal. This is often when patients
were too patient, scarred, will continue. Then the indication for long-term therapy
sometimes got less simply higher of acid and symptoms. They had more than two
attacks of gut. They present with topo-fi, and they are willing to continue life's lung
therapy. So the ureluorine therapy include prophylicid, which is a unit question,
agent, and it acts on the last pathway of combat, which is acid, into alentum,
and a prenal and ribosylcytes are sine thine also goes in inhibitors,
which is where there's adenu to hypo-sine thine, then to sine thine, and also
so hypo-sine thine, that's one part, and the second part is from the sine thine to the acid.
Then you can use the lenecine nuac, which in all else let's say the ureluorine
is one and within all two, ureluic acid is transported to the kidney,
--- page 10 ---
by which the ureluorine peripachute is associated with acid absorption, and that's
an inclusive general ureluic acid expression, which involves sine thine peripachute levels,
and this is often indicated for chronic rate check out. So the indications for aliprenal
regacious gut increase ureluic acid excretion, renous efficiency, and chrolithiasis,
ureluco-suric, agent, infectivist, and if someone is over the eighth of 60,
and also the prophylaxis for tumor lysis. And then the indications for the ureluic
cross-suric agent is normal acid excretion, creating clearance of over 680 months
per minute, no easter open for the fases, h below the age of age, below 60 years,
and patient that does not apply low dose at a scientific disease.
So this is just to summarize that new basic clean labs on identification
are when it comes to gut management. Thanks.
