--- page 1 ---
Nick pain and back pain.
Nick pain is a relatively common condition.
Its lifetime prevalence ranges around 71%.
And the point prevalence affects approximately 9.5% males and 13.5% females.
Disabling Nick pain may count for about 4%.
There's a close relationship between the nature of one's occupation and Nick pain.
And Nick pain may be associated with specific types of physical occupation,
such as manual workers versus sedentary occupations.
There may be other positive associations and these may include heavy workload,
level of education, depression and older age.
So Nick pain may be referred from distant structures, such as anterior neck structures,
the thyroid, the pharynx, larynx etc.
It may be due to involvement of the cervical structures itself.
So the cervical bones, the vertebrae nerve compression around there,
the spinal cord, a musculature as well around there.
And it may be due to mechanical causes.
Acute neck pain.
Acute neck pain accounts for majority of neck pain.
And generally it's a short onset.
It's self-limiting in that it will resolve eventually within a short period of time
with or without symptomatic treatment.
And if it's often due to mechanical problems.
Some of the causes of acute neck pain.
So rhinocorticalis may be a cause of acute neck pain.
And this presents with severe pain and stiffness on awakening.
X-rays are generally normal.
And this is often due to malalignment of the facet joints.
And the pain generally settles within a few days with analgesics, muscle relaxants
and botulinum toxin.
Another cause of acute neck pain could be due to acute discretusion.
It's less common than lumbar disc problems.
And it may be due to a sudden twisting movement or whiplash injury.
Often associated with motor vehicle accidents.
--- page 2 ---
It may be associated with severe pain, aggregated by head movements.
And one may present with very stiff neck with marked muscle spasm.
Hence the need for muscle relaxants and muscle relaxants.
And often there may be referred pain to the shoulder or to the arm.
There may be associated muscle weakness, diminished reflexes.
And with posterior compression of the cord, one may present with a compressive myelopathy.
X-rays are usually normal.
And the treatment would involve analgesics, immobilization and a soft color.
Chronic neck pain is neck pain that is continuing for more than six weeks.
It is generally due to musculoskeletal issues or disc genulation.
However, one needs to exclude other serious and potentially treatable pathologies such as disc abscesses
and neoplasms of the cervical spine.
Pyogenic or tuberculosis are some of the most common causes of disc abscesses.
Now disc abscesses, emergency, it's a pyogenic or TB abscesses often due to a common cause of disc abscess.
And they usually result in severe cervical pain in a very stiff neck.
And it may result in pain on all ranges of movement.
And they may also be a protrusion around the cervical spine called cifosis.
Often there may be fever, systemic upset, bone tenderness associated with elevated inflammatory markers, specifically in ESR
and a raised white cell count.
And the x-rays may show destruction of the disc and adjacent bone.
Neoplasms, okay, often the patient would present with fever and weight loss.
The pain is usually greatest at night and when the patient is lying down.
This may be due to infiltration, there may be infiltration of the spinal cord and vertebral column.
And there may be metastasis from a primary carcinoma.
The patient may present with extensive root signs.
And it may not always be malignant.
It may be due to benign tumours such as a neurofibroma.
And the x-rays would show litic lesions on the vertebral bodies.
Back pain may also be non, sorry, neck pain may also be non-mechanical in nature.
And some of the red flags would be the individual's age, okay?
So older people or one should have a higher index of suspicion for malignancies and metastatic bone disease, okay?
Younger people, one should have a index of suspicion for inflammatory pathology such as your spondylar properties.
The past history of a carcinoma always consider metastatic bone disease.
--- page 3 ---
And if a patient has recently or previously had surgery, always consider infectious pathologies for neck pain.
Specifically if it's the nature of it is non-mechanical.
Individuals that are immunosuppression, okay, also consider whether the patient is having an infection
related to their immunosuppression, okay, or bone marrow pathologies.
And non-mechanical back pain, the red flag would be if the patient is presenting with fever, weight loss, systemic disease.
And they may be at increased risk of hermatogenesis, causes, osteomyelitis or septic arthritis.
Non-musculous little sources of neck pain, okay?
So this would be referred pain.
And if an individual has pharyngitis, laryngitis, co-larynx, or tracheitis, they may present with pain referred to the neck.
Also, thyroiditis, lymphatinitis, caratidinear dissection.
And myocardial infarction and gyne pericarditis may present with radiation of pain to the neck,
as well as diaphragmatic inflammation or infection.
So other than non-mechanical back pain, one may have features to suggest an inflammatory type neck pain, right?
And this may be due to rheumatic diseases, okay?
And the common rheumatic diseases that would present with neck pain would include polybiology rheumatica
and often affecting women older than the age of 60.
And patients would present with pain stiffness in the proximal muscles of the shoulders, thighs,
and there's immobility or jelling or mourning stiffness on first rising.
So these would be the indications that the patient may have an inflammatory type neck pain.
Other more rare conditions would be polymyositis, but this would present with widespread myalgia,
specifically involving proximal muscles of the shoulder girdle and hip girdle.
And this would occur in association with an abnormal lab test or an elevated creatinine kinase level.
Rheumatoid arthritis may also be a cause of inflammatory neck pain, okay?
And in association with the neck pain, one may have polyarthritis.
So arthritis affecting other joints of the hands, foot joints, knees, etc.
And one should request a flexion extension view of the C1C2.
So this can show subluxation of the joint if there is rheumatoid involvement of the cervical spine.
Another cause of inflammatory neck pain is ankylosing spondylitis.
If neck x-rays do not reveal syndesmophides, a Ferguson view of the pelvis may be useful for sacroiliators,
and this can help with the diagnosis of ankylosing spondylitis.
So another consideration should be fibromyalgia, okay?
And the patient would present with specific signs, symptoms, and associated symptoms.
And the clinical signs would include tender points.
--- page 4 ---
So these are localized pain on digital pressure, and patients may benefit from aerobic exercise antidepressants.
So there are specific tender points in the body, and generally there is a classification criteria for fibromyalgia
that includes tender points, and they may be also trigger points as well.
So trigger points is basically radiation of muscle pain distal to the area of pressure,
and this is common with your myofacial pain symptoms.
And management of this would involve injection of local anesthetic and corticosteroids.
Trauma, okay?
So flexion problems would result in compressive forces to vertebral bodies and discs.
So flexion trauma, and then destructive forces on the posterior spinal elements and neck muscles, okay?
And then extension injuries, compress posterior cervical structures,
they distract anterior components, example, the disc, anterior longitudinal ligament.
Extensive injuries carry a worse prognosis.
Extension injuries carry a worse prognosis for the development of chronic pain.
So the quality of pain is important to try and identify whether they are mechanical, shooting, deep, et cetera.
It's important to classify the different types of pain so as to try and identify the underlying cause.
So if a pain is mechanical in nature, the patient will describe it as dull, deep aching,
and the exacerbations will be short-lived.
Shooting pains are generally described as an electrical type pain involving, and this is due to involvement of their neural structures.
The pain may also be deep unremitting with no periods of relief and maybe due to ongoing distention, deformity or invasion of pain sensitive structures.
Frequency and duration of pain is also important.
Mechanical pain is experienced in episodes.
It's related to movement and exertion and it's made worse by particular postures and exercise and it's improved by rest and immobility.
Pain that is not altered by movement and worsens spontaneously should alert one to a more sinister underlying cause.
The site and radiation of pain is also important.
Intrinsic neck pain radiates into the head and down onto the shoulders.
Headache is common with upper cervical pathology, especially C3 and above.
Pain from lower cervical areas can be referred to the shoulder girdle, arm, interscapular area and chest walk.
So often associated symptoms such as peristhesia can also help one to identify the underlying cause of the neck pain.
So peristhesia numbness tingling without the interminestable sensory damage.
Peristhesias that abate with change in posture and face head trunk peristhesias would indicate a C1 to C3 nerve root involvement,
whereas numbness of the neck, shoulders, arm, forearm and fingers would indicate involvement of C5 to C7 nerve roots.
Now root disorders and some of the clinical signs will be loss of reflexes and dermatomal sensory loss,
myotromal motor weakness and one should confirm this with nerve conduction studies.
--- page 5 ---
So clinical examination is of the utmost importance to exclude other concomitant conditions.
So such as infection, malignancy, inflammatory atropathy as well as neurologic involvement.
General examination is important to exclude non-mechanical causes of neck pain.
So one should always look for lymph nodes, lymph nodes, look at your other joints, do an abdominal examination and a breast examination.
And then of course a neurological examination is also important.
Local examination.
So on local examinations or examination of the area that is involved, observe the posture, the movement at the neck joint
and one should also observe the patient's gait.
Observe for any spinal deformities, muscle wasting and exclude local infection and lymphidinitis.
Palpate the larynx, thyroid, lymph nodes and carotid arteries to exclude inflammation of these areas
that may cause a referred pain to the neck.
Palpate for muscle tenderness, especially your trapezius and levator scapulae and your rhomboids.
Okay, so the range of neck movements.
Okay, so movements at the cervical spine will include your flexion, extension, your left lateral rotation, right lateral rotation, left lateral flexion and right lateral flexion.
Investigations that one may want to do to investigate your neck pain.
So plain x-rays is useful in trauma and may indicate a fracture, subluxation.
The most useful views are your lateral flexion, extension and your open mouth views.
Also useful to exclude primary bone disorders such as pejus disease, malignancy and sclerosis as well as osteomyelitis.
Rematic disorders such as your idiopathic skeletal hypostosis or dish and your ankle-losing spondylitis.
Investigation, so mechanical pain, the value of plain x-rays may be limited.
However, cervical spondylosis can be diagnosed on it x-ray.
The presence of degenerative changes in the spine does not always correlate with symptoms of neck pain.
So CT is of value in assessing bone structures, especially for foraminal stenosis.
And MRI is sensitive for disc herniation to exclude any intercord pathology or compression as well as bone infection or inflammation or osteomyelitis.
However, 20% of asymptomatic patients will have an abnormal MRI.
60% of older patients have abnormal intervertebral discs.
A bone scan or an isotope scan may be of benefit as it is sensitive for bony pathology such as bony metastasis or infection, especially where plain x-rays are normal.
And it may assist in differentiating between inflammatory versus degenerative changes.
Laboratory investigations, so there's no real role for laboratory investigations in mechanical neck pain.
However, if one is suspicious of tumors or infection, then a full blood count, especially if there's an elevated white cell count.
An elevated ESR, CRP and a raised alkaline phosphatase would be useful in these instances.
So the management, so infection tumors and rheumatoid arthritis, one would have to manage the underlying condition.
Okay, and then with regards to nonspecific treatment of mechanical neck pain, so simple energies such as paracetamol are safe over a long period of time.
--- page 6 ---
However, if the neck pain is persistent, severe and chronic, then opioids such as propoxypene, coding for severe refractory cases may be indicated.
However, these should be used with caution as it has a high propensity for abuse dependency, and this may become a major problem going forward.
Patients may often require antidepressants, tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline at low doses for nocturnal sedation,
and sometimes may require antidepressants as well because chronic pain is often associated with mood symptoms,
symptoms and depression.
Non-specific therapies include exercises, so the two principal aims of exercise is to restore a normal range of movement
and to strengthen your neck musculature, and it helps to prevent acute exacerbations.
Physical therapy such as heat or cold therapy, ultrasound, traction, massage may have some limited benefit.
The other nonspecific therapies may include manipulative manipulation or chiropractic manipulation,
and they aim to correct vertebral subluxation.
They help to stretch tight joint capsules, and mobilization through oscillatory movements of spinal joints may be a small benefit.
Other therapeutic modalities may include posture correction, modification of workplace environment,
looking at ergonomics and adjustment of seating devices to decrease extreme movements of the neck,
decrease amount of time in a fixed cervical posture.
More specific treatment, for example, injection of the zygopopacial joint with local anesthetic or steroid
generally is of no benefit.
Disc excision and fusion may be of benefit in certain instances.
So, cervical nerve root compression, so the natural history majority resolve in a few weeks to months,
but there's a group of less than 10% that have persisting moderate or severe disability.
So, treatment modalities, there's no long-term difference between using a cervical collar physiotherapy or surgery.
However, these modalities may, cervical collar may be one of the non-invasive modalities,
including physiotherapy that may be of benefit.
There's no evidence for the superiority of one intervention over the other,
and the choice hinges upon minimizing harm.
So, therapies which increase the patient's perception of improvement may be tried, including physio-traction,
tens or transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation may be used as a pain treatment modality,
as well as isometric exercises.
Searching is unlikely to affect a cure.
It improves symptoms faster than conservative measures,
no long-term difference when compared to conservative treatment.
All right, then moving on to lower back pain.
So, the definition of low back pain is pain, which is localized below the line of the 12th rip
above the inferior gluteal folds with or without leg pain.
--- page 7 ---
The classification, it may be specific or non-specific.
Okay, specific lower back pain usually has an identifiable pathological cause,
non-specific lower back pain.
Usually there's no known disease or pathogenic mechanism that is causing the back pain
and the anatomical source of the pain is usually obscure.
The prevalence of lower back pain is extremely high.
So, in one's lifetime there's a 75 to 85% prevalence of lower back pain.
And the yearly prevalence in the USA is between 15 to 20% and in Europe 25 to 45%.
It accounts for a large proportion of GP consultations in 1992 in the UK between 5.5 to 7.5%
of GP consultations in the UK, which is for lower back pain.
In 1990 in the USA about up to 2.8% of GP consultations were for lower back pain.
The natural history of lower back pain, only 50% of patients are off work for more than six months.
Who are off work for more than six months return to work.
Almost nobody returns to work after two years of absence.
Okay, so the occupational lower back pain.
Okay, this varies between different industries.
And there's an increased association with heavy physical work, static work posture and psychosocial factors.
So, the recurrence, the lifetime recurrence is up to 85%.
In Sweden, the lifetime recurrence in one year was 44%.
So, the recurrence in one year was 44%.
In Canada, one year recurrence was 20% and three year recurrence was 36%.
Occupational risk factors, the highest was nurses and drivers.
So, back pain often accounts for a major cause for sick leave and sick days leave from lower back pain.
The average in 1983 to 84, it was 28.9 days in 93 to 94, 105.8 days was due to lower back pain.
Lower back pain, if it is chronic, is often associated with other psychiatric symptoms.
And these symptoms often precede the onset of lower back pain.
And they include depression, substance abuse, anxiety, as well as personality disorders.
Back pain is the second leading cause of sick leave.
Low back pain is the most frequent cause of limitation of activity in the young and the middle aged.
There's one of the most common reasons for medical consultation and the most frequent occupational injury.
Some helpful statistics, back pain affects two thirds of adults.
It's a second to upper respiratory tract infection and frequency.
It affects men and women equally and it's most common between 30 and 50 years.
--- page 8 ---
It's an expensive cause of work related disability.
And there's often uncertainty about the optimal approach to back pain.
90% of low back pain is mechanical.
And due to a muscular ligamentous injuries, age-related degeneration in the intervertible disc and facet joints,
spinal stenosis, disc herniation, osteoporotic compression fractures, spondylosis and spondylocysis.
The natural history of back pain, generally they should be a spontaneous improvement.
50% use usually better after one week.
More than 90% of back pain should be better at 8 weeks and 7 to 10% beyond 6 months.
Only 7 to 10% of lower back pain persists beyond 6 months.
Medical causes for lower back pain are uncommon, but they are important so it's important not to miss them.
So some of the medical causes may include spondylatropides, spinal infections, osteoporosis and malignancy,
and of course referred wistro pain.
So pain from pelvic structures, renal structures, aortic aneurysm and pancreatitis.
Clinical evaluation is therefore of the utmost importance.
The precise anatomical diagnosis is often elusive.
So is a systemic disease causing the pain?
Is a neurological compromise that may require surgical evaluation?
Is a social or psychological distress that may amplify or prolong pain?
So management often involves watchful waiting.
Patient education is important, spontaneous recovery is the rule,
and those who remain active despite pain have less future chronic pain.
Exercise has prevention power.
So patients should be advised to rest for 2 days or less.
Energy ethics can help to permit activity.
Reassess if the pain worsens or neurological symptoms develop.
So why not get imaging studies?
So firstly because imaging studies can be misleading.
Many abnormalities are as common in pain for individuals as indoors with back pain.
If patients are under the age of 60, there's a low yield, there's unexpected x-ray findings.
Ocarina 1 is 2, 2500, bulging discs in 1 of 3 patients, and herniated discs in 1 of 5 patients.
Over the age of 60 and pain-free, herniated discs may occur in 1 out of 3 individuals,
bulging discs in 80%, and all have a related disc and apothecial joint degeneration.
Spinal stenosis may occur in 1 out of 5 cases.
--- page 9 ---
So this is an algorithm for the management of back pain.
Conservative management, so conservative management if it doesn't work, and the pain persists
and the individual develops durology, then that's a red flag and imaging studies should be conducted
as well as lab tests.
So red, what are the red flags for serious back pain?
So if an individual is presenting with back pain, but in association with the back pain has fever, weight loss,
pain which is worse when lying down and worse at night, if there's associated morning stiffness,
and if the pain is lasting for more than 6 weeks, in an individual over the age of 50, with new onset pain,
and if there's abnormal neurological signs as well as point tenderness, then these are all red flags for serious back pain.
And this is an individual that you will identify for further investigation with imaging and laboratory investigations.
So further evaluation, so the goal is to discriminate between benign causes and disorders that may require further diagnostic studies.
And diagnostic studies would include x-rays, CT scans, and MRI.
Useful lab tests include a full blood count, looking at your white cell count, your ESR as an inflammatory marker,
calcium and alkaline phosphatase that may identify bone mineral causes for the back pain and protein electrophoresis
that may identify neoplasms or benign causes for the back pain.
What should I be worried about?
Okay, so a herniated disc, if there's spinal stenosis, if there's other spinal cord syndrome such as coder-acquiner syndrome,
if you're a younger patient and you have signs of an inflammatory spondylarthropathy,
if there's spinal infection, then you would require more urgent treatment.
If there's a vertebral fracture, malignancy, and referred visceral pain.
So the imaging studies and spinal stenosis, okay, this basically shows your imaging studies, a CT scan that shows spinal stenosis
and then your CT biologram which shows canal occlusion with flexion due to spondylarlysis.
This is a CT image that shows disc herniation and it shows a protruding disc.
The black arrow shows you that the protruding disc is compressing the tickle sac.
These are the features of ankylosing spondylitis on x-ray.
So, sacroiliators showing the sacroiliac joints with inflammation of the sacroiliac joints
and then the vertebral x-ray showing your sin, bridging, sin, desmophiles, okay,
which is typical of your bamboo spine and your ankylosing spondylitis.
These are your involvement of the sacroiliac joints in an individual with spondylarthropathy or ankylosing spondylitis.
Spinal infection, okay, this shows a disc that is involved in infection, spinal infection, okay,
and it also shows a spinal or pelvic bone involved in spinal infection.
And then this x-ray clearly depicts your weight fractures in an individual with osteoporosis with multiple
compression fractures.
--- page 10 ---
You can see that the density of the vertebral body is markedly reduced on these x-rays.
Multiple bioloma is the red flags for spinal malignancy is that pain is worse at night.
It's often associated with local thinness, okay, of the bone.
And for blood count, ESR protein electrophoresis would be abnormal and the ESR is elevated.
In addition to your x-ray findings, then one should have a high index of suspicion.
When is surgical referral indicated?
So sciatica and probable herniated disc.
Caudé quina, progressive or severe neurological deficit, persistent neuromotor deficit over four to six weeks
of conservative treatment, persistent sciatica with consistent neurologic and clinical findings.
And these may be indications for surgical referral.
Okay, and if there's spinal stenosis, there's progressive or severe neurological deficit
and persistent back and leg pain, improving with flexion and associated with spinal stenosis on imaging.
If there's spondylolisthesis, if this is progressive or severe, if there's severe neurological deficit,
there's severe back pain sciatica with functional impairment that persists for more than one year.
So I often tell my patients that the indicators for surgery is debility, so if you are unable to perform
radially activities and you're functionally impaired and if the pain is unbearable,
then those may be your indicators for surgical intervention.
Some key points about lower back pain.
So 90% are due to mechanical causes and will resolve spontaneously within six weeks to six months.
One should pursue a diagnostic workup if there are any red flags that are found on initial evaluation.
For example, if the ESR is elevated, then one should evaluate for malignancy or infection.
In older patients and initial x-ray to diagnose compression fractures or tumors may be of benefit.
The address is not recommended for low back pain or sciatica with a rapid return to normal activities usually showing the best cause.
Back exercises are not useful for the acute phase but help to prevent recurrences and treat chronic pain.
Surgery is appropriate for a small proportion of patients with lower back pain.
So with regards to further reading, these are the resources and these are the references that you can read.
And the first one is from the NEJM.
It's an article on lower back pain and the second one is also an article from Rheumatology Journal Lower Back Pain.
Thank you.
