--- page 1 ---
So, previously osteoarthritis was considered to be a disease of older individuals.
It was thought to be more due to degenerative disease of the cartilage.
However, in the past decades, there's much research that has gone into osteoarthritis
and we now know that the pathogenesis, the underlying cause for the disease is much more
complicated and it is thought to be a dull disease no longer.
So what is the osteoarthritis characterised by?
So firstly, there is focal softening and disintegration of the articular cartilage.
And this is accompanied by the proliferation of newborn.
So, when we speak of newborn proliferation, we speak of osteophyte formation on the margins
of the joint.
And x-ray changes, there are typical osteoarthritis, include number one, joints face narrowing,
secondly, sub-condrel sclerosis and marginal osteophyte formation and the last x-ray finding
which is not included in the list is the development of sub-condrelsis.
So, the characteristics of osteoarthritis are basically damage to the articular cartilage,
increased activity in the sub-condrel bone and marginal osteophyte formation.
And we'll discuss the same for the detail with the illustrations on the next slide.
So, this is a simple illustration, basically describing or illustrating the network of collagen
that makes up the cartilage.
So, this network of collagen basically is placed in this manner to maintain the strength
and integrity of the cartilage and also to maintain the water content and hydration of
the cartilage.
Now, if this collagen network is disrupted for any reason, then the integrity of the
cartilage is compromised and that results in erosion of the cartilage, damage to the
cartilage, dehydration of the cartilage and resulting in microfractures within the sub-condrel
bone and then all the other pathological features then manifest resulting in osteoarthritis.
Okay, so, when we look at the cartilage, it is also made up of chondrocytes or cartilage
forming cells that keep the cartilage hydrated, however, remember that the cartilage is an
--- page 2 ---
inural a vascular structure.
It receives its nutrients from the vascular supply of the sub-condrel bone.
This flow diagram basically describes the mechanisms that are involved in the pathogenesis
of osteoarthritis and the mechanisms that are involved in the damage to cartilage and
sub-condrel bone.
So, the stimulus is basically something like a trauma or a mechanical injury or metabolic
factors that result in stress on the cartilage itself.
And it affects the chondrocytes and these chondrocytes then produce enzymes that break
down the cartilage, that break down the collagen network and release alkaline phosphatases
that further result in damage to the cartilage and loss of integrity of the collagen network.
And these mechanisms in combination then result in the disease process which results in osteoarthritis.
Okay, so this is a picture basically illustrating the damage to the collagen network, the loss
of the structure of the collagen network which then results in compromising the sub-condrel
bone and then these micro fractures in the sub-condrel bone and then damage to the joint itself.
So cartilage, the purpose of cartilage is basically to act as a shock absorber, the fluid
within the cyanobian lines the joint and prevents excessive stress on the joint and
redistributes the stress and the forces that impact the joint.
And when the structure of the cartilage is damaged and the collagen network is broken
down, these stresses on the joint are redistributed as you can see here.
And then they cause further damage to the collagen network and then result in micro fractures
in the sub-condrel bone.
This diagram basically illustrates what a normal joint looks like and what an osteoarthritic
joint looks like.
So damage to the joint with regards to osteoarthritis of the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis involves
the capsum, it involves the cartilage, it involves the synovium and it involves the
sub-condrel bone.
So what happens is that there's thickening of the capsum surrounding the joint, there's
--- page 3 ---
cyst formations in the sub-condrel bone, this sclerosis in the sub-condrel bone and this
shelving of fibrillation in the cartilage and newborn formation of osteoarthritic liping
with synovial hypertrophy and altered contour of the bone.
So within the joint space itself or within the synovium, there's an inflammatory infiltrate
and with this inflammatory infiltrate there's fluid buildup within the synovium which results
in hypertrophy of the synovium, stretching of the joint capsule and with this constant
stretching and inflammation there's thickening of the joint capsule as well.
And with the redistribution of stresses on the joint and a loss of the collagen network
et cetera as I explained in the previous slides, this micro-fracturing alpha relation
of the sub-condrel bone and then there's newborn formation with the marginal osteophyte formation.
So looking again at the mechanism of joint damage, we said that there is a disruption
of the collagen fibres, there is dehydration or decrease in water content of the cartilage
and then this then results in splitting on the surfaces of the cartilage.
The chondrocytes which are cartilage forming cells then release enzymes which result in
digestion of the cartilage and micro-fractures within the sub-condrel bone and then synovial changes.
So osteoarthritis is a very painful condition so the main symptom of osteoarthritis is
pain within or around the joint and the pain in osteoarthritis is often multifactorial
and due to a number of mechanisms and the source may come from the synovium, it may come from
the sub-condrel bone from the osteophytes that develop from the ligaments or capsule or from
the muscles surrounding the joint itself. And the mechanism with regards to the synovium is that
there's inflammation within the synovium so there's fluid buildup and increase in
inflammatory cell infiltrate. There's also sub-condrel bone involvement with this increased pressure
or modality hypertension within the sub-condrel bone which results in micro-fractures and this
can also result in significant amount of pain because remember we said even though the cartilage
is a neural or a vascular the sub-condrel bone has vascular structures and neural structures within
them. So if these areas are affected it will cause significant pain. Then with the osteophyte
formation on the marginal borders this results in stretching of the capsule and stretching of
--- page 4 ---
the periosteum which will further result in pain and then the ligaments and the capsules
around the joint then become of inflamed as well and distended and then the muscles surrounding
the joint and then go into spasm. So all these mechanisms in combination can result in significant
pain around the joint in osteoarthritis. So let's look at the epidemiology of osteoarthritis,
symptomatic osteoarthritis. So patients who have osteoarthritis that complain of
a knee pain for example or disability discomfort in the Framingham study they looked at the UK
population over 55 and they found that 9.5 percent had knee osteoarthritis and 15 percent of the
population over 55 had knee osteoarthritis. Hip osteoarthritis 0.7 to 4.4 percent and hand
osteoarthritis 30 percent in the UK.
So when we speak of radiographic osteoarthritis so this is incidental findings of osteoarthritis
in a patient that is asymptomatic. So those features that I mentioned on the first slide
when you do an x-ray even though the patient is not complaining of anything we may find these
features on the x-ray and this is referred to as radiographic osteoarthritis and involving the
hand 32.5 percent of adults in the US may have a radiographic hand OA 75 percent of females between
the age of 60 to 70 years in Holland and then with regards to knee radiographic OA 33 percent of
people aged older than 63 years were found to have a knee OA in the Framingham study.
So who is affected by osteoarthritis? Osteoarthritis is found throughout the world and it is thought
it is found to affect a woman more than men particularly post men and post women.
The peak onset of osteoarthritis is that is an older individual between the age of 50 to 60 years
however it can affect younger individuals depending on different risk factors such as
occupation anatomical abnormalities and family history genetic predisposition etc.
So the classification of osteoarthritis it can be divided into primary OA and secondary OA.
Primary OA usually has an idiopatic cause and this can be further divided into localized or
generalized osteoarthritis. Secondary osteoarthritis there usually is a presiding cause and some of
the causes may be trauma, previous surgery, anatomical or developmental abnormalities,
metabolic or endocrine inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis,
miscellaneous other causes. So when we speak of localized osteoarthritis we this is generally
--- page 5 ---
less than three joint areas that are involved for example involving the hands or nodal OA
involving your proximal and distal interpilential joints in the hand or first carpal meter,
carpal joints at the base of the thumb, foot joint involvement, knee joint involvement, hip
joint involvement or spinal involvement. When we speak of spinal osteoarthritis the more common
term that is used is spondylosis of spondylisthesis and generalized osteoarthritis refers to more
than three joint areas for example hand joint hip joint knee joint that will be referred to as
generalized osteoarthritis. The causes of secondary osteoarthritis trauma or surgery okay so previous
trauma particularly individuals who are involved in motor vehicle accidents with knee injuries
they are prone to developing osteoarthritis and patients who have had previous surgery for
example in their knee joint or other joints such as the hip joint they are prone to having osteoarthritis
within those joints as well. Perthes disease and anatomical or abnormalities of the femoral head
for example these would predispose to development of osteoarthritis as well. Other metabolic
endocrine conditions as well such as acromegli hyperparadhyroidism may predispose one to OA.
Secondary to inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis
and miscellaneous other causes may result in osteoarthritis.
So the symptoms okay so often patients present with pain and the pain is usually non-inflammatory
it's related to movement and unlike inflammatory type pain which improves as the day progresses
and improves with movement the pain with osteoarthritis is usually worse when the patient is moving the
joint or when the patient is active. The stiffness in osteoarthritis usually lasts for less than 30
minutes so the early EMS is early morning stiffness and it's usually less than 30 minutes as opposed
to inflammatory type arthritis which is usually more than 30 minutes to an hour. The stiffness
usually occurs after inactivity and these usually also reduced range of movement at the joint
associated with the other symptoms and they may be functional impairment and the joint may feel
unstable because of ligament laxity and muscle weakness with the joint with the muscles around
the joint becoming wasted as well. So the signs so on examination one of the signs of osteoarthritis
so crepitus is common especially in the knee joints and this is the cracking of the joint as you
passively flex and extend the knee you can feel the crepitus over the knee joint. Then one may have
--- page 6 ---
tender spots around the knee joint and the joint margin when you palpating the joint
they'll be swelling of the area around the affected joint and this was explained in the
diagram of the swelling because of the inflammation, the stretching of the capsule, the thickening of
the sinobium etc and fluid within the joint as well can cause swelling. Furthermore there
may be instability of the joint just maybe due to ligament laxity and muscle weakness as well
there may be restricted range of movement there be joint deformities for example flexion deformities
of the knee joints and friction deformities of your hip joints as well and this can be very
debilitating and can restrict one's mobility. A synovial thickening and joint effusions may also
be present in osteoarthritis. So are there any risk factors for osteoarthritis and yes there
are susceptibility factors and there are mechanical factors. So susceptibility factors are generally
things that are predisposed want to develop osteoarthritis and the older one gets the more
susceptible you are to the development of osteoarthritis. If you are a female you are more likely to
develop it, your race and ethnicity may have a role in the development of osteoarthritis,
obesity as well especially in the weight bearing joints like the hips and the knees,
obesity may predispose or predisposition to the development of osteoarthritis in those
joints. Genetic factors may play a role in nutritional factors such as vitamin deficiencies
like vitamin D deficiencies, calcium deficiencies etc and then osteoporosis as well maybe a
susceptibility factor. Mechanical factors so injury to the joint, so injury to the joint,
to the cartilage, to the ligaments would affect the integrity of the joint and then predispose
that to develop that patient to developing osteoarthritis, occupations such as manual
labors, farmers etc that those occupations may predispose to development of OA and the shape of
the joint as well. So if you have a you are born with an anatomically abnormal shape of the hip
joint for example then because of the redistribution of stresses on that joint, that joint would be
more prone to damage and development of osteoarthritis.
So OA increases with age, in patients less than 45 years they have a 2% chance of having
osteoarthritis but as one gets older to the older than 65 years you can see that your chances of
getting osteoarthritis increases drastically to 68%.
--- page 7 ---
So in female patients often they have a DIP joint involvement, first copper metacarpal
joint involvement and knee joint involvement particularly because females are involved in
occupations that involve their hands okay and their seam stresses, their uses etc and that may
predispose to a copper metacarpal joint involvement as well. Knee joint also with the increased body
mass index and obesity, females may have a higher propensity for knee joint osteoarthritis.
With regards to males they often have hip joint osteoarthritis, this may also be related to
activity, sporting activities and occupations. Hormones, a reduction in the risk of knee and
hip OA has been noted with the user hormone replacement therapy and the association is thought
to be stronger in those who have been on hormone replacement therapy for a longer period of time
and it's also thought to be stronger in people who have more severe osteoarthritis or bilateral
osteoarthritis. So there is a low prevalence of primary hip osteoarthritis and nodal osteoarthritis
in black patients, so ethnicity may play a role as well and then obesity. So there's
increased risk of osteoarthritis with obesity. With the BMI operated in 30 you may have a 4-4
greater risk of osteoarthritis and if you lose weight then you reduce your risk of osteoarthritis.
So losing 5 kgs of weight may cause up to 50% of reduction in your risk of knee osteoarthritis
in someone who has a BMI of greater than 25. Genetic practice, so there's a strong
familial tendency for nodal osteoarthritis. So nodal osteoarthritis is the bony swelling
that involves the small joints of the hands particularly of proximal intervalential joints
and your distal intervalential joints and this is thought to be due to an abnormality in the
collagen 2A genes in families with premature osteoarthritis.
Nutritional factors, so vitamin C and vitamin E they have antioxidant properties and deficiencies
of these vitamins may be a contributing factor to development of osteoarthritis.
And there's a higher rate of radiographic progression in patients who have 25-hydroxy
vitamin D deficiency. There's a strong inverse relationship between osteoporosis and osteoarthritis.
So if a patient has osteoarthritis they're less likely to have osteoporosis and vice versa.
And factors that may be associated with premature osteoarthritis are mechanical factors
and these factors include increased risk with joint injury,
--- page 8 ---
meniscal tears, previous menisectomy,
and in certain occupations such as quaternal and textile workers would be more predisposed to
hand osteoarthritis. People who are involved with regular bending new heavy loads will be more
prone to knee osteoarthritis and farmers for example that are working in the fields, etc.
will be predisposed to hip osteoarthritis. Shape of the joint such as pothase disease,
congenital dislocation of the hip, slipped capsule of purposes. These may cause an increased
rate of osteoarthritis because of redistribution of stresses on the joint because of the abnormal
shape of the joint. And then when we look at prevention is it possible
Well these different levels of prevention primary, secondary and tertiary. So the primary levels
of prevention are targeted at healthy individuals, secondary intervention is targeted at patients
who have early asymptomatic osteoarthritis and these are the radiographic osteoarthritis
and then tertiary is targeted at individuals who already have developed significant osteoarthritis
and these interventions or preventive strategies are to prevent disability in individuals with
established disease. So primary prevention okay so it's important to identify high-risk groups
for example people who may have genetic predisposition older individuals especially those over the age
of 50 family history, previous injury or surgery occupation. So these groups of individuals should
be targeted for primary prevention. And then primary prevention strategies include weight loss
or preventing injury protection of the joint, changing one's occupation if you are at high
risk of developing specific types of osteoarthritis and then preventing sport training errors
during muscle strengthening exercises particularly your shoulder girdle and hip girdle muscles
your quadriceps strengthening exercises will help to protect the joint and prevent
development of osteoarthritis. Homone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women
may assist as well and nutritional factors such as nutritional supplements, calcium vitamin D,
vitamin C and even vitamin E has been shown to be of benefit.
Tertiary prevention so in those individuals who already have deformities with established
osteoarthritis then weight reduction is very important to prevent further damage to the
joint and to protect the joint, supplementing vitamin D is important and then muscle strengthening
--- page 9 ---
exercises is important. So what are our aims in terms of management of patients with osteoarthritis?
So number one is to educate the patient, educate the patient in all those preventive
strategies that we spoke about reducing your body mass index watching how you exercise
or protecting your joints during sporting activities etc. And then the second aim is to relieve the
symptoms, so the symptoms of pain particularly and then to optimize function and improve quality
of life and then to minimize the risk of progression of the disease.
Then management includes non-pharmacological, pharmacological and surgical measures
and we'll discuss them individually at the following slides. The pharmacological measures
so pain is one of the most debilitating symptoms of osteoarthritis. So to control your pain you
often require analgesics such as paracetamol and opioid such as tramadol for knee osteoarthritis.
Patients may have inflammation of the joint as well with significant swelling and pain
and may require non-steroidal anti-inflammatories. If there's an effusion and a lot of inflammation
within the joint then this needs to be aspirated and they may require inter-articular
corticosteroids, they may require viscous supplementation and glucosamine sulfate.
One should be very cautious with use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories,
particularly individuals over the age of 65 years. Those with history of peptic
ulcer disease impaired renal function, poorly compensated heart failure,
hepatic dysfunction and those who are one anticoagulant such as warfarin, aspirin and
other blood thinning agents.
So surgery in osteoarthritis may include arthroscopy so basically just to wash out the joint and to
remove debris within the joint. Osteotomy is very, very done now with the advent of joint
placement surgery and then joint replacement surgery is indicated for those individuals who
have significant pain, significant disability, significant reduction in their quality of life
and they may require joint replacements. Arthrodesis as well, this procedure also very
really performed with the relative ease and new advancements in terms of joint replacement surgery.
This is a picture of an individual with nodal osteoarthritis involving the distal intervilantial
joint and on the x-ray itself you can see that there is joint space narrowing, there's sclerosis
--- page 10 ---
and there's osteophyte formation involving the distal intervilantial joint and you can see that
there's all the these at the second and the third distal intervilantial joint sine forward there.
This is just a closer look at all those x-ray manifestations that we mentioned.
You can see that there's joint space narrowing, this osteophyte formation,
this subcomdosis and this sclerosis.
Okay, this also shows nodal osteoarthritis involving the proximal intervilantial joint
distal intervilantial joint as well. These are x-rays showing DIP joint involvement,
PIP joint involvement and first carpal metacarpal joint involvement.
Okay, this is an adducted deformity which is typical of osteoarthritis of the base of the tongue or the first carpal metacarpal joint and you can see on the x-ray as well there's erosion of this joint here, the first carpal metacarpal joint there and this is typical of osteoarthritis.
Okay, this further shows you the joint space narrowing, the sclerosis, okay, and the osteophyte formation on the first carpal metacarpal joint.
Okay, then you can have osteophyte formation on the cervical spine or cervical vertebrae as you can see here at the corners of the vertebrae.
This is spiking osteophytes and they can sometimes cause significant problems.
It can cause compression of your esophagus and difficulty swallowing, etc. and significant pain.
Okay, this is another picture showing the vertebral bodies, the cervical vertebrae with narrowing of the joint space and osteophyte formation.
Okay, and then you can see the marked, the huge osteophytes on these vertebral bodies here and somebody who has severe osteoarthritis of the spine or the vertebral body.
Okay, and these are severe deformities in an individual who has severe knee joint osteoarthritis with also foot joint deformities as well.
And you can see that there's a genuine various deformity there resulting in marked disability.
This shows hip joint osteoarthritis. You can see the hip on the left, the joint space is obliterated, there's basically no joint space and there's marked sclerosis and osteophyte formation as well.
Okay, and this further shows also a hip joint osteoarthritis with bulging of the acetabulum into the pelvis as well and this can cause significant damage related to osteoarthritis.
Okay, that brings us to the end of our lecture on osteoarthritis. Thank you.
