--- page 11 ---
e and serum, where the pulmonary
nodules, exposure of the normal prognosis, following exposure of such silica, can have
small airway to these nodules. They can have reciditis, as we said, nodules,
they can have tendonship swelling, the tendocyanovitis, as we mentioned, and the nodules have
simply been in the nodosus, where they cannot put in urea. So all patients with eye will also
check for me, the ligands have put in urea. This is not so common now. And then spillumically,
with the felty syndrome, where patients will have uropinea, nodules, it's really great.
So that's what I feel about the felty syndrome. Can you grab our cells, which are pumps out
our cells often, or include dimmer, they can have sensory, water,
so all of these are important to look for. And nodules, as we said, apart from being in the
sense of surfaces of the joint, if you must be found in their lungs, heart,
they can be very very benign, but they may be associated with the fact that isolation can be
to be in urea. Patients with extracellular involvement are smokers, those with any disease
of significant disability and positive matter better. So this is just to show you what how
commonly nodules you can look like. You can see it as you look yesterday. Of course, when you look
at this, you can see that they're nodules, but you have to ask for a CT scan of the chest.
So it's just to show you the problem of the nodules, which are the excess surfaces of the
the NCPs. You can also see them on the PRP joints, on the PRP. When you have a patient like this,
you can also have to put differentials, diagnosis or nodules as you include
guard. And in regards is commonly men, of course, but also women,
that postmen, post-cell women. So when you see this, you also have to think about the
possible little guard, of course, but the nodules are different in terms of description, in i.e. and in
patients with guard, a lot of patients with guard nodules.
And then you can note the nodule as well, the index is the size of that elbow. And yeah, you can see that
as well as the patient has got by size as an evaluation of the person, what the elbows does are,
students are homes. Nailful, capillary and fat, dailor and fat,
those are ulcers. Come on soon, you get punctured ulcers with ones.
Digital ulcers can also be present, patient with severe moisturizers,
and then esclitis, esclitis, esclitis usually okay in the setting up active on the toad.
The diet is associated with a side nose, set of thickness, and eye pain.
Scural management can also okay, or it is a degenerative thinning of esclitis,
I can see that the skin is very thin here, so that can also be a complication in our ear,
and the atelia necrotizing sclerosis without inflammation, which is going to measure.
Pepperines can also okay with the exfoliation of the small painless and separating holes in the
skeletal tissue. So those can also okay. So patients, we have the classification criteria that we
--- page 12 ---
can use, patient with rheumatoid arthritis. These classification criteria are not to
have nose, of course they are to classify a patient, but we do not have diagnostic criteria,
so we use this classification criteria, but you have to use them with caution because they
were developed in patients with establish disease, so that means if the person or the patient does
not, it is called ARA, if you use one of these, you may risk them. So a clinical judgment is very
important as well, but this can also be useful. So looking at the number of the joints that are
involved in the number, the more the smaller joints involvement, the higher number as you can see,
if you have a serology with a positive or negative, if it's positive, you get high pounds,
especially a strong positive, and then the duration of the symptoms is more than six or six weeks,
then you get a point of less than that, you don't get it found. If your lesion is really
important because they are the things that are happening there, and before that someone can have
the answer with the answer, for example, which can be a self-limiting, and then actually face
the answer, which is they are normal because you get a point of the amount you don't get found.
So I score six or more is considered to be
or to align with the definitive, or definitive eye. You also have to know that
the negative amount of data is not new person, the patient does not have a good arthritis,
it just means that they are so negative, not so positive amount of arthritis. So we use this
a couple of ways. One is to not have gender so positive or so negative, so classify them,
and if they are positive, the risk of them progressing is higher, and developing
a lot of, I mean, extra communication is higher compared to those who are several negative. So
those are the reasons why we have this or differentiating with person as much as positive and negative.
So in terms of investigation, that's what you can do, either diagnosed, so either
de-leged, or de-leged, or the purpose of only the classification purposes. You can put it back
way. If the person has got some arthritis in higher positive, stronger positive, then he's
finally started to have no doubt that they have a lot of arthritis, but they can have another
condition with that, like an over there, some sort, but use those in the knowledge of all
classification criteria, instead, with no focal activity, which I would say are for ESR,
you also do, I don't know, it's a test to exclude the condition like SLE in a patient,
in a correct patient, basically. So you can't look for SLE in an 8-2-old without any
clean cup, which is, but if the patient is young, 15 to 45, got a sign of arthritis,
you can clinically ask for some, some suggest they will have a cognitive tissue disease,
or autoimmune disease, but we also want to look for, like, a neurodegenerative,
because they may not have extra immune stations, but they may have other manifestations, like
immunological or immunological features, to suggest other conditions like SLE. So we do
have a test to look for that. We also do, therefore, monitoring into the chemical complications.
--- page 13 ---
So, a rheology, start with the plane hydroglabs, can do, looking for erosions specifically,
or at the complications of long-standing rheumatoid arthritis,
and then sitting in my arm doing this, generating test, looking for, at the possible causes if we
do sit in my eye. So, I've already spoken about these, of course, and then apart from
the other tests I've mentioned, the ASR, the mutagulitis therapy, you're increasing,
we have to have these, because we may have to dose just some of the medications
that we use, lethal function tests, also being important, cause of the metabolism,
of this realm. In the viral serology, our peptides are being seen,
each other cause a dynamic, cause of the activation of these, it's now treated, I think.
I better don't treat patients or don't treat them, but you have to choose a safe or safe
attack, if they have any of these, and you're not sure about the control.
Then, comatopressor is very important, but to also to know that it may be normal in
healthy individuals, as I mentioned, and that you can be abnormal, you know,
patients who are prevented as an ovary after 2 to 10 to 25 percent of these,
and in patients with certain infections, such as TB, HIV, hepatitis C,
we would better be in a cardiac test.
So, geopress, when you're looking at the extremes, they may have not specific findings,
such as soft tissue swelling, heart joint, for example, just after that, bust a pinion,
bust a pinion, bust a pinion on the joint, most not at all, and that's what you're looking for.
Then, we have joint space narrowing, they may have inkylosis,
as much as some people may not okay, but then, they may have deformities as well,
self-luxation, they can see that, um,
some swelling, feels like there's some soft tissue swelling around there,
the joint, I mean, on the hand, but that's not specific really, and then,
you can see the small erosion there, um, on the right MCP,
the O-right MCP-5, for these cochlear joints, um,
fine, but this is actually the, um, distal, um,
PIP. So, that is what you're looking for.
So, when I say distal, PIP, I mean, it's on the, uh, distal, proximal, sorry about that,
the proximal aspect of the, uh, PIP, because it's got a metacarpal, but that's joint,
but that's the metacarpal. So, you've got the couple of joints just to irritate everybody,
you've got the couple, the couples, got the metacarpals, they've got your, um,
um, um, proximal, uh, phalamus, um, muscle and distal. So, when you're looking for
erosions, you have to see where they are, because if they are erosion, distilling,
those may not be significant. Um, it was not sort of looking for soles, you know, the MCP-5s,
--- page 14 ---
the PIPs, all you can see is some of the metacids on the, um,
couple on some joint space known. Then, here I can see these erosions are quite significant,
with, um, joint space. So, here we've got dejosions, joint space narrowing,
which are symmetrical distribution with the PIPs and PIPs, um, and, um, and some PIPs and the dists.
And these are really marked considered origins here. Um, and you can see them in there as well,
as, um, um, into the Asian, PIPs,
Plastiphenia, um, and, um, transplacinally.
And the foot, I will be looking for the PIP metacarpal head erosion,
and see if they, it's also there as well, but then the foot metacarpal, um,
so, uh, erosion, the head.
And the knees, looking ahead, um, transplacinally,
erosions, um, especially, you can see here,
this significant transplacinally. And, um, they are erosion,
this joint does not know more, because they are some buster brides as well.
So, aesthetically, uh, synovial and short multi-pitch of the upper tissues
with importation by this stimpercides and plasmid, you can see,
synolosinally, this is a synovial inflammation.
So, rheumatoid arthritis progression, um, got illy, got entangledate, got late.
So, with synovial, um, as I would, uh, in any disease,
occasionally got new nucleation, right? Of course, there's purposes, as you can see,
but it's wound, really. And with that information, there's also disability.
And this ability, you can see that it continues, right?
Uh, this is just the plateau of synovial inflammation.
This continues, now about chin, and reason why the disability is there,
is because of the deformities and, um, the higher, uh,
this is the, um, disability or the erosion of joint
on my tissue, continue behind the disability as well.
Um, so you have to take a left in mind, if the patient is disabled,
two things may be happening, either there's ongoing inflammation,
or that is because of the damage for that joint. Okay?
So, the consequences of IV include premature mortality,
increased morbidity, significant impairment of quite soft life,
because of pain, fatigue, um, depression as well,
and then work with disability, um, 25% in the same year as I said,
but filled into the new one years, and is, um, reduction in income,
--- page 15 ---
this is now work with disability or the same.
So, there are significant consequences of IV,
which is why I had to be treated with kidney.
Treatment or approach to management to prevent the diagnosis,
define the goals, make an assessment of disease activity,
educate the patient, then, um, uh, discuss and any shape,
non-ecological therapies, as well as joint therapies. Okay?
So, the goals of treatment is to really pain and inflammation,
prevent, um, um, prevention of the reversible joint damage,
preservation of function and improvement of disability,
improvement of quality of life, alteration of natural history of disease,
but these are the goals of the treatment.
Assessment and monitoring, we use different, um, tools.
One is, um, for disease activity, we do use disease, um,
activity score 28, um, disease analysis is 28 because we're looking at,
28 joints, um, that is your, on your hands with 10 joints,
um, which is your MCPs and your PIPs.
Um, your, um, your MCP, your PIPs, uh, forecast the intervention
in the individual joint of the thumb, so that makes 10.
And just the hands and the wrists, we've got two wrists,
so that makes it 12.
Um, and then your shoulders, that makes it, um, uh, 14.
Um, then you have the knees, um, push, makes it 16.
Um, so to start afresh, you have your knees,
your elbows, shoulders, and the wrists.
All the folds will make it eight, plus the hands, which you've got 10 on one hand,
10 on the other hand, that makes it 20.
So that's 28 joints in total, so that's what you're assessing.
Don't assess the, don't improve the ankles and fatigue,
yeah, because the knees can be swollen or tender for upper knees,
and so that's why we don't count them.
So that's that's 28 or C-dine, which is a two-part disease activity index.
Okay, style as well.
The difference between C-dine and S-dine is that, um, S-dine is also CRP,
that you can use.
--- page 16 ---
So we're looking at solo joint count, tender joint count, patient over assessment,
physician over assessment, ASL, CRP.
Um, so monitoring, checking the function, the extremes, as well as the ASL sound.
So with assessments, um, of the patient, symptoms, right, looking for last patient
about pain, swelling, stiffness between good disability and stimulation,
looking for all that was spoken about.
Joint, swelling, mechanical, damage, extractory, which is function, status,
self-came, vocal, and avocal, also avocational.
And then investigation, uh, radio, what we were spoken about,
which is for the information markers, check my part,
they'll open up in Colleen Bay, right, the kidney, and the extremes,
particularly the extremes of the hand and feet, and then the other selected
trends depending on the patient's presentation.
So, um, but it's kind of like this, so I'm going to pass much on it,
and I don't think I need to, I know this disease activity index,
you can go past few of this.
And these are the joint that I was talking about before,
just with the state of God, your, um, five here, plus five, same side, same as this side,
which makes it 10, 10, and then 12, 14, 16, 18, and then the one side, of course, just with the eight,
and the 10, 10, 12, 12.
So, this is activity of what it is looking about.
I'm not going to stay here, but you just have to know,
and you're looking for this, doing this, you want to know that the patient has,
um, tip disease, is that you're not really too high or very high,
or they have no disease activity, or they should not be useful.
It's remission, or this is activity.
And there are different scores, depending.
So if someone, if you're using, um, the, they, you don't believe against remitism,
score, remission, if someone did their remission, they had to have a score
of less than 2.6, and all this is activity is a score of 2.6, 2.2, less than 2.6.
2, and then higher than that is.
I have a moderate or several.
So, approach certain, of course, you're patient at the center,
and they are, if they're not a disappearing approach in terms of treatment,
they'll include the patient, the family, the nurse, you make with a pathetic surgeon,
--- page 17 ---
depending, include the physician, because when you see this patient,
you also want someone to continue treating the patient and following the patient up,
because we don't have capacity to follow this patient in the month.
Um, you believe, um, which person are therapists, which you often do,
the social worker, who's a therapy, and the general practitioner.
Um, so for patients to help to make sure that, um, you'll inform the patients,
uh, about the disease, to make self-management decision, and to cope with having chronic
disease. So, education includes experience for the patient, the nature of the disease,
naturally cause chronic and systemic manifestation, using, um, very simple language.
Um, we have to talk to the patient about behavioral medication for doing exercise,
weight, control, um, work, joint protection, emotional support, um, treatment of course,
dopamine, and occupational treatment. Please, an association with a strong association between
our aim and obesity. So, um, obesity on its own, is associated with, um, low threshold for pain,
disability, the inflammatory markers may be elevated, is on CRP. These patients also have
either harmful to conditions like rest of the dietists, depression, and diabetes.
And, uh, they may have treatment, they, uh, because of
sticky dietists, laser to obesity, practicing efficacy, and infection. So,
when you have a patient with obesity, um, these are treated as special cases, because
these are the things that have to look for, uh, if time will come to you, if they have a labor
problem, kind of just saying that that is related to the medication, it can actually be as a result
of the underlying problems that they may have. A fraction of the control, is all of the physical
therapy to educate the patient, relieve pain and control of inflammation, preserve the improve
function, exercise, uh, advice, prevention, and protection of deformities,
ability and distal evaluation of independence, where it's possible. So, when you're very patient
to the physician, that you're better at physical therapy, what we're under therefore, is to, um,
to show, show exercises that really improve pain, stiffness, range of motion, and muscle strength.
Okay, so, they also teach them certain things as well. So, um, they're always quite certain,
you can say this, education, education, activities, teaching about the tips of their living, how to
cope with those, and they can also make certain, um, devices, um, the patient is not able to,
use their hand adequately, they can, um, provide certain devices and, um,
splints, prosthetic and dynamic movements, joint protection technique,
and preservation of an improve mental function. These are some of the things that can be
advised to the patient, um, you're then going to use a working aid, and the correct working aid,
is certain devices that can be used by the team, they can hold,
hold, um, also in the bathroom, it's going to be safe, um, uh, bathroom, or to make sure patients
--- page 18 ---
don't fall, um, and they're able to be supported when they're taking it back, but let's just go
forward in doing it yourself, and setting things that they can use the household as well to, um,
um, um, um, to the household, so it's important to, um, make sure that patients will be able to just, um,
as well, um, before you actually send them for surgery, or send them for surgery,
or send them for surgery, or send them for surgery, or send them for surgery, or so one thing to be
comfortable with the footwork, and this patient, the client, they, you know,
with wearing a flat shoe, um, maybe they, um, with no full support, and they may be
being comfortable because of the self-luxation in their foot, and so you need to make sure that
that is what it's looking to, um, same, yeah. Oh, these are the areas that they can, because,
uh, use, uh, foot taps, um, that's what the thread is, what it's putting certain things at home.
Then you cannot sort of further them for surgery, um, the soft tissue surgery,
such as ten surgery, joint surgery, make an excision, uh, excision, a trophist, or a clasium,
trophist, um, and this is a patient who has an actual dose, as well, the electrist,
and the cell schedule, um, and such as your fortress.
And then when we come to drugs, we offer treatment for symptomatic treatment, uh,
symptoms management, um, then the, um, are those that help with, uh, disease activity,
and anti-inflammatory drugs, uh, could be insane with your dose. So, this is a modifying therapy
with gut, the conventional synthetic d-mines and then the biometrics, with the, um, conventional
synthetic d-mines, for the color-consulted sinuses in the funeral light,
and then the act that others apply to drugs. We have to know that I guess if expect
potential I guess, basically, to the judge and communicate with the patient, because they
mean to have a treatment, in fact, most of them take the treatment, um, if they experience my
physically, then they might, or will help, or will not talk about it. So, you have to inform
the patient about these. I'm not using, I could still pain an adult. I think geometry could
prove them all the time, and the checks in, and you have to also think about the risk,
um, based on the patient age, or if someone is elderly, uh, you have to think twice, um,
and we are prescribing, um, in, uh, NSA, specifically both because of the kidney-related
side effect, can also, um, cause genetic side effects. So, you have to, in the liver, I can also
also, you have to, um, use these as a question. So, mention genetic side effects.
Some of these side effects have been proximate, like the cognitive use, including
target classification, guess, mouth asses, headache, dizziness, drowsiness, indigestion,
um, hearing coppers, tingling at the arms and legs. In general, you really cause
nausea, drowsiness, constipation, which is more common, which is perfect for patients.
And then, steroid, often don't mind doing steroids for long period. The time you could do
means the longest possible dose, because of the, um, risks related to it. Um, and when you use the
--- page 19 ---
steroid, you have to use, um, protection against osteoporosis, vitamin D passing. Um,
we can use steroids, only, uh, injection. So, often, injection used in traumatic surgery,
um, will barely, barely use IV in R-A, which usually in traumatic surgery will interact with you.
Steroids do not really alter disease, unnatural disease, are a history of the disease. So, when you
use them, just not use them for the symptom, treatment inflammation, um, in a way, you have
to have control of the inflammation. So, most patients like to use them, which are not good.
Um, so, if a patient is losing a lot of stress, just not that slightly, that
disease is not controlling, that can be a problem, because in the continuum,
uh, sometimes we have a mast, and we're not able to find a tenderness, as much as they need to put
pain, so we can go home. Um,
all patients with personality disease should be on disease modifying therapy. This is to
alternate oral history of the disease, flu onset of friction, control inflammation, preventative
pain. So, the treatments, um, is listed here, high jobs occur,
caroprene, caroprene is in the way long time, in this long time, cold. Steroids and states
office are losing chixes, and then pyhoxics became available in primate to mentate. Before that,
we had all these medications in their way, so they're better. Um, they're the biologics,
we've got tenet alpha inhibitors, uh, autogonist, uh, got the taxamette, which I've been,
and they said they're 20, to send this in there, until they're 10, 6, bioset, um, and they check
to inhibitors. So, this is just for you to manage your own time, but to take a need to
know this anyway, just need to know that you can just see that if they're not,
decide to publish to them, and think that we've got the high budget, so maybe they're
not the biologics that we can. Triting to target is what we need, cause, like I said,
we aim for the mission, but we have settled the lotus's activity, um, Triting has to be adjusted,
at least a day, first, one, three months until, um, target is reached.
Um, I want to speak for slides, because, um, usually, um, the slides that you can, you know,
please, in your own, and I believe they are beyond the scope of this talk, really, but it's just
to let you know that we have them. And then, try not to attract us in pregnancy, it's possibly
important, because if someone is pregnant, we may have to stop most of these medications,
and all of them are safe, but then the safety profile may be normal compared to the other
for those drugs. So, with children pregnant, we will have to stop all potential,
the tilt of genetic drugs, pre-pregnancy, that is, need to check-sate, clear the mind,
um, you have to stop, uh, disease control, children pregnancy, it's often 1,700% of the patient
can flare, flares up after pregnancy, um, you also have to think about what the patient is
breastfeeding, and which drugs are safe, same, check-sated, for the high dose, not safe,
and the high dose is still not cause much. So, if you do, you still have to get all those
--- page 20 ---
pregnant, children pregnancy, and also have to discuss future pregnancies, um, with the patients.
So, a daily patient has to, they have to plan pregnancy, because, um, you may need to stop
the medication, setting medications before, before pregnancy, these are six months before
pregnancy, and depending on what they are on. So, I use an aggressive disease,
patients with RA two times more likely to have MI, 17 times per cent, more likely to have a
stroke of 17 per cent in the life of the developed infection, 25 times increased risk of 9%
per cent. So, it's very preventable, not really, but you can prevent the progression of disease,
um, and disability or children, and we find this better. Um, so, the bottom patients, um,
when you see patients, you want to see them, um, early, maybe within six weeks of something,
or six weeks, three months, um, so, instead of the symptoms, and that's the ideal period.
Um, but patients, those usually delay, and the longer they delay, the higher the progression
of the disease. Um, so, that is a challenge. The challenge is related to the effect that
isn't, uh, differential, um, a timeless diagnosis, and the start of intervention,
and then it affects us around this. So, in conclusion, I use a chronic cause of disease that
is a really impact quality of life and, uh, expectancy, and can lead to substantial
diets and diet costs, and more than 50% of costs are utilized by, yes, and 10% of
the I.A. patients, and successful treatment can lead to just mortality.
So, as much as I costs are very high, very few patients that have I.A. actually utilize,
um, these costs, most of them cost related to I.A. those, uh, indirect costs,
around the loss of jobs, um, to work. So, with the era of biometrics, it is, um,
um, easy to treat are a, even at an ideal world, but when, oh, god,
can't go as much as they do not, and our big bone is, which is exciting at this. The
patients develop side effects in our foods, and I'm just finding we in the public sex,
are we not going to suck, but it happens when we do use to taxamate, um, which is a
one-on-one-on antibody, and this use patient take every six months, two doses every six months.
Okay, so that concludes our talk for today. Thank you.
