--- page 1 ---
The Spondyloathropeties. The Spondyloathropeties include ankylosing
spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis or retis syndrome as it was
previously known, antipatic arthritis and juvenile ankylosing spondylitis.
It's important to make a diagnosis of inflammatory spinal pain and together
with the presence of cyanobitis to identify an individual with a spondyloathropetie.
And spinal pain or cyanobitis with asymmetrical lower limb involvement
could often be a presentation of a spondyloathropetie.
So with regards to the criteria, one or more of the following variables
is usually present when a diagnosing or classifying individual with a
spondyloathropetie. They usually have a positive family history of a
spondyloathropetie. They may have a personal history of psoriasis or a family
history of psoriasis, a history of inflammatory bowel disease,
uritritis, sub-sitis, diarrhea, buttock pain and the spondyloathropetie or
sacroiliators. Now remember all the presence of one or more of these
characteristics will help us identify the type of spondyloathropetie that the
patient has. This is basically an x-ray showing us the sacroiliac joint
involvement in an individual with the spondyloathropetie and the sacroiliac
joints are basically these joints here and you may have erosions,
sclerosis and fusion of these joints in advanced spondyloathropetie.
Other characteristics include as we mentioned sacroiliators or inflammation
of the sacroiliac joints with or without spondylitis. Spondylitis will
basically be involvement of the axial spine and inflammation of those
areas of the axial skeleton. You may or may not have peripheral arthritis
associated with the axial arthritis and the inflammatory peripheral arthritis is
most commonly lower limb asymmetrical with large joint involvement. For
example, your hip joint, knee joints, ankle and foot joints but you can also have
small joint involvement as well in individual with the spondyloathropetie.
Then another feature that might indicate a possible spondyloathropetie is if
their patient also has endosopetie. Endosys is the point of insertion of a
tender or joint to the bone and you can have inflammation at this point of
--- page 2 ---
insertion either due to degenerative changes or due to a
spondyloathropetie. Other features that may be associated with
spondyloathropeties is uveitis or eye involvement. You may get skin lesions or
mucocutaneous skin lesions but these are specific type of skin
lesions that may be associated with the reactive type of arthritis.
Often your serology is negative so patients would often have a negative
rheumatoid factor, a negative anti-nuclear factor and generally they
don't have rheumatoid nodules. They may have a genetic predisposition
depending on the ethnicity as well. They may have a higher prevalence of
HLA B27 gene present and they may be familiar with aggregation as well.
Other extra-articulum manifestations include aotitis and conduction
abnormalities.
So this is the ASAS classification criteria for axial spondyloathropeties
and the entry criteria for this classification is basically
back pain in an individual with an onset of the pain in an individual who is
younger than 45 years and if the pain is chronic going on for more than
or equal to three months. So the criteria could, entry criteria could
include x-ray findings which is sacred elators on x-ray
plus x-ray or an MRI scan plus a greater than one spa feature.
The spa feature features are listed below on your layer on my left
or you could have a genetic predisposition which is HLA B27 gene
present with more than equal to two other spa features.
So the spa features that are listed here is your inflammatory type
back pain, arthritis, anthocitis, uveitis, dactylitis,
psoriasis, crones, or colitis. A patient usually has a good response to
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. They may have a family history of
spondyloathropeties. The HLA B27 may be positive and they
may have an elevated CRP. If the HLA B27 is positive
then two other features of a spondyloathropetie
may classify one as having a spa.
--- page 3 ---
Then in addition to this, sacred elators on imaging can help one make
make a diagnosis and sacred elators on imaging would include
active inflammation on MRI, highly suggestive of sacred elators associated
with spa. Definitely geographic sacred elators
according to the modified New York criteria.
So when we discuss spondyloathropeties it's very important to define what
inflammatory back pain is. Inflammatory back pain
must be differentiated from mechanical back pain.
It's usually back pain that occurs in an individual that is
less than 40 years of age or less than 45 years of age.
It's usually insidious onset. It's chronic pain that
usually is lasting for more than three months.
The patient will often complain of stiffness in the mornings when they
arise and the stiffness and pain generally improves during the
course of the day or improves with exercise and does not
improve with rest and often the patient may complain
of nighttime pain or nocturnal pain and getting up during the course of the
night with severe lower back pain.
Then important to note is the prevalence of the genetic
predisposition to spondyloathropeties which is your ATLE B27 gene.
In South Africa in Caucasians it may be found in 8.56% of
Caucasians and then going with regards to the other ethnic groups you can see
the lowest prevalence is seen in the Indian
population with the prevalence of 2.2%
in the colored population 3.3% and then in the African population 4%.
So with regards to prevalence of AS in adults and in the general population so
a general population and closing spondylitis may be
present in only about 0.2% of patients.
In individuals who have B27 positive
they only 2% may actually have ankylosing spondylitis
--- page 4 ---
but in individuals who has a B27 positive and has a first degree
relative who has a ATLE B27 positive they may have a high prevalence of
anchors losing spondylitis and it's it was found to be almost 20% in
those individuals.
So what are the associations of the HLA B27 gene?
Okay and the disease associations is listed below.
With regards to ankylosing spondylitis it has
more than 90% association. The active arthritis and 85% association
inflammatory bowel disease 50%, psoriatic arthritis spondylitis
are 50% and then peripheral arthritis with psoriatic arthritis only 15%.
What is the role of HLA B27 testing?
So when you are making a diagnosis of ankylosing spondylitis it will assist in
the clinical diagnosis. However it is not a routine diagnostic
or confirmatory test as we looked at the prevalence of
HLA B27 it's relatively low and it becomes lower in certain ethnic groups.
It's not a screening test in the general population however it's useful
it's a useful test depending on the clinical setting.
And in the appropriate clinical setting its usefulness and its
specificity for certain diseases like ankylosing spondylitis can be
very high. It aids in the diagnosis of SPAR
other than ankylosing spondylitis. However it's unable to distinguish between
ankylosing spondylitis and other types of spondylarthropides.
The clinical criteria for ankylosing spondylitis so the modified New York
criteria is listed in the slide. It looks at a history of
inflammatory back pain and we defined what inflammatory back pain was in the
previous slide. It looks at inflammation of motion of the
lumbus spine in extension, flexion and bending forward.
Then it looks at your chest expansion relative to standard values for age
and sex. A normal chest expansion should be about five centimeters.
DevNet signs up inflamed sexual electroins on the x-ray.
--- page 5 ---
Patients with spondylarthropides may also have non-vertible symptoms as well
so other than the axial joint involvement they may have
peripheral arthritis and the common patterns of the peripheral arthritis
is that it's maybe asymmetrical and then you may have arthritis of the
toe or the interpilangial joints. You may have
dactylitis or sausage digits, you may have acolysthenosinovitis,
plantarpeciitis, costochondritis, i-ritis and neuprocutaneous lesions.
So with regards to endosopathy and emphasis is the site of insertion of
a tendon, ligament or articular capsule to the bone
and there's a number of endosale points in the body. However,
inflammation of these sites may help when diagnosed and
spondylarthropathy. Endosopathy may also be caused by trauma, degenerative
disease or spondylarthropathy.
So the various sites of endosopathy is your issue of tuberosity, your
tibial tubercle, your anterior part of the patellar
created to counter the femur, the aces which is the anterior superior
iliac spine, the iliac crest, the malioli,
plantar aspect of your heel of the calcaneus, the spinous processes of the
vertebrae. So important to palpate these lesions
to elicit tenderness and swelling in these areas.
So with regards to drug therapy and enclosing
spondylitis, now spinal and sacroiliac
joints. So the drug first line of therapy is
non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, either intermittent versus continuous
and the recommendations, especially for spinal type pain,
is to have continuous dose of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory at
least for three months before one moves on to the next line of
treatment. In addition to the non-steroidal enplanatories,
analgesics and muscle relaxants are sometimes also used.
So with regards to disease modifying therapies,
--- page 6 ---
the conventional demands like your sulforacylazine and your methotrexate
are mainly used for treatment of peripheral arthritis if it's present
but generally it does not have much efficacy for the axial joint involvement.
In the spondylarthropathy, the first line of therapy after your
non-steroidal anti-inflammatories is your anti-TNF therapies
and these may include a tenor septune, plixima, etc.
So moving on to psoriatic arthritis, what are the clinical features that may help
when diagnosed psoriatic arthritis? So firstly,
it's an inflammatory type arthritis. It may be differentiated from your
other inflammatory type arthritis like rheumatoid arthritis
by the fact that it involves your distal interpilantial joints.
The different patterns of psoriatic arthritis, which I'll discuss on the
next slide, but commonly they may be asymmetrical
and may be associated with the actulitis or sausage digits.
There's often nail involvement with psoriatic
nail changes such as nail-putting and oncolysis.
There's usually no nodules that are present and generally the rheumatoid
factor is negative.
So there are different patterns of psoriatic arthritis in the x-ray
findings, so you may have an erosive arthritis without osteopenia.
You may have sacroiliac joint involvement with the inflammation of the
sacroiliac joints and sometimes more often than not, this may be asymptomatic.
You have sin-desmified formation, parrovertical ossification and then
enthosopathy. This is an x-ray that shows an individual
with the distal interpilantial joint psoriatic arthritis.
You can see the erosions that are involved here.
You can see the extensive erosions and the destruction of the entire
joint. Typical of arthritis mutilands, where you may have
shortening of the digits and telescoping and this is a pencil in
cup lesion that is seen on the distal interpilantial joint with
--- page 7 ---
severe erosions involving the proximal and the distal
surfaces of the joint in the distal interpilantial joint.
This is the spinal involvement, so you would get
bridging sin-desmovides where the sin-desmovides cross over from one
vertebrae to another and these may extend on either side of the vertebrae
and result in a bamboo spine hole, complete
stiffening of the entire vertebral body.
Okay, so furthermore, so the patterns of psoriatic arthritis, so you may have
axial joint involvement. You may have peripheral joint
involvement and that the peripheral arthritis, you may have
distal interpilantial joint arthritis. You may have oligo-aticular,
which is four or less joint involvement, four or less
joint arthritis and this is often asymmetrical
or you may have a pattern of disease which is very similar to rheumatoid
arthritis with small joint symmetrical polyarticulane
in their nature and then of course the arthritis
mutilands which is a deforming type of arthritis associated with
psoriasis.
With regards to therapy in psoriatic arthritis,
okay, so non-steroidal anti-inflammatories are also indicated for the
treatment of psoriatic arthritis and the in south
bacalazine and methacexate to treat the peripheral arthritis
and then of course the ductalitis, the anthocitis and the axial involvement
may respond poorly to the first three measures and an
anti-TNF therapy may be indicated. In other
newer therapies, newer biologics are your interleukin 1223, which is your
eustachinumab and then your sacrokinumab, which is your
interleukin 17.
Okay, so reactive arthritis. So reactive arthritis is usually a spondyl
arthropathy following a urogenital or gastric infection.
--- page 8 ---
It's different from a septic arthritis. So septic arthritis is when
the sepsis within the joint itself. The reactive arthritis is usually where
there's an infection in a distal site that results in
inflammation of the joints.
It's immunologically mediated response to a distant pathogen
and there's usually antigens from triggering organisms
such as chlamydia, yesenia and salmonella.
And what is the classic triad of reactive arthritis? So these are
involvement or conjunctivitis, arthritis and urethritis.
Some of the extra-articular manifestations that may be present include
keratoderm of lenoragicum, which is a
popular squamous rash, most commonly affecting the palms and the
soles. You may get a nail dystrophy that can also
occur with reactive arthritis and this may sometimes overlap with
features of psoriatic arthritis. You may have
cercinate balinitis, which presents a shallow ulcers on the
glance of the or the shaft of the penis and is plar clagant hypercarostatic.
You may also have oral ulcers on hard palate or tongue, which are typically
painless. Okay, so this is keratoderm of lenoragicum,
papulus, squamous, type rash on the soles of the feet.
These are oral ulcers that may be associated with reactive arthritis and
this is the cercinate balinitis or the ulcers on the
shaft of the penis that may be present.
So with regards to treatment of reactive arthritis,
so chlamydia induced reactive arthritis requires prolonged treatment
with antibiotics such as tetracyclins, lemicyclin, elitromycin
and it results in a reduction of post chlamydia elapsis from 37% to 10%.
Interopathic arthritis, so it's arthritis that accompanies
the inflammatory bowel diseases, which is the Crohn's disease and ulcerative
colitis. In an individual who has a colonoscopy,
--- page 9 ---
who has a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease,
would then develop sole intended joints, always considered and telepathic spondylar
arthropathy. Arthritis occurs in 10 to 22% of patients with
inflammatory bowel disease. There's a higher prevalence in Crohn's
disease than ulcerative colitis. The arthritis may occur
before the gastrointestinal symptoms by a lengthy period and then the
patient then becomes classified as an undifferentiated spondylar
arthropathy and then the inflammatory bowel disease may only
become obvious later on. Or the arthritis may typically be
prosiaticular, that means just involving a few joints, okay,
an asymmetric, usually involving joints on one side of the body
and may occur in my glitchy pattern in some patients.
Interopathic spondylarthropathy has a predilection for the lower limb
joints and may often be associated with dactylitis and
anthocitis. The activity of the peripheral arthritis
generally correlates well with the degree of active bowel
inflammation, particularly ulcerative colitis. So if the patient has
active bowel disease, then they will also have swollen and tender joints.
So there's usually a good correlation between the disease activity in these
two areas. Some of the non-articular complications
that can occur is skin manifestations such as pyodermagangronosum,
eye manifestations such as anterior uveitis,
and other skin manifestations such as erythymonodosum.
So what is the therapy for interopathic spond?
A non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, again, spustline therapy for axial pain
and lower back pain. However, caution must be used
in patients who have inflammatory bowel disease as this may
worsen inflammatory bowel disease. Silasus by a
solvacylazine for peripheral arthritis may be beneficial.
Sometimes steroids may be beneficial, especially with the peripheral
--- page 10 ---
arthritis. Anti-TNF drugs, particularly,
infliximab may benefit both the arthritis and the inflammatory bowel disease.
Okay, this is an individual who is having axial involvement
possibly from an interopathic spa as well.
This basically is showing the syndesmo fight, which is bridging across from one
vertebral body to the other. Okay, and then these eventually
progressed to involve more vertebral bodies and then results in the
fusion of the spine.
Okay, these are basically erosions at the corners of the vertebral bodies.
Okay, and these early erosive changes may be associated with
the spondylar properties. You can see the formation of the
syndesmo fight at the edge of the vertebral bodies.
Okay, this is basically showing you different degrees of sacroiliac joint
involvement in your spondylar properties with complete
sclerosis and fusion here and erosions, whereas there's early sclerosis and
erosive changes here in these sacroiliac joints.
Okay, this is also showing us a complete
fusion of the joints in an individual with
sacroiliitis and a spondylar property.
Okay, and that is the end of our lecture on the spondylar properties.
