--- page 1 ---
OSTEOARTHRITIS 
 
Overview of learning outcomes 
Definition of Osteoarthritis 
What is the disease process? 
Mechanism of joint damage and changes in the joint 
Causes of joint pain 
Epidemiology of osteoarthritis 
Who gets OA and where does it occur? 
Classification of OA  
Symptoms and signs of OA 
Radiographic features 
Risk factors for OA 
Genetics & osteoarthritis OA and ageing 
Prevention of OA 
Management of OA 
 
 
Definition of osteoarthritis 
Osteoarthritis (OA) is one of the most common causes of disability, but until recently it 
was dismissed as an inevitable result of the ageing process. This view is changing, 
and inflammation plays a role in the pathogenesis of OA. 
Osteoarthritis is characterized by focal softening and disintegration of cartilage and proliferation 
of new bone. 
 
What is the disease process (Pathology) 
The hyaline articular cartilage is regarded as the primary site of the disease, but 
changes also occur in the bone, synovium and capsule and at joint margins. Cartilage 
degradation is accompanied by variable degrees of repair and inflammation. 
 
The supporting framework of cartilage is made up of a series of collagen fibres, 
attached to the underlying bone, which extend in arcades into the more superficial 
layers of cartilage. These fibres withstand compressive forces and are joined together 
by a biochemical glue (protein molecule) to provide stability. 
 
The composition of the articular cartilage includes collagen fibres, proteoglycan 
molecules and water. The proteoglycan molecules have a hyaluronate backbone 
and branches of keratan sulphate and chondroitin sulphate chains. They are 
joined to the backbone by link proteins. The function of these huge molecules is 
to attract and retain water in the cartilage. There are only a few chondrocytes 
scattered throughout the matrix, mainly in the deeper layer. They contain material 
for building collagen as well as breaking it down. 
 
Cartilage provides an elastic covering for the ends of bones in joints like the knees 
and hips. When weight is borne on the joint, a small amount of fluid is squeezed 
from the cartilage into the joint space, and drawn back when the load is removed. 
 
Mechanism of joint damage: 
Cartilage Collagen  
- disruption of collagen fibres  would allow  an increase in water content which leads 
to  vertical splits  on the surface of the cartilage which are seen early in OA. 
 
Chondrocytes : they contain many enzymes which are capable of digesting the 
cartilage. These enzymes may be released following trauma and biochemical 
disturbance or due to other factors. 
 
Other postulates regarding the initiating event in osteoarthritis have included 
primary changes in the synovium influencing the cartilage and the 


--- page 2 ---
development of microfractures in subchondral bone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Causes of joint pain in OA: 
Pain due to osteoarthritis is one of the most common causes of chronic pain.. However, the 
mechanisms of OA pain are poorly understood. 
1. Local pathological processes within the joint. 
2. Neuronal mechanisms and alteration in pain processing: peripheral nociceptive 
sensitization and neuropathic mechanisms may be involved at some stages. 
3. General factors such as genetic and metabolic factors which may play a role in OA 
pain 
 
Epidemiology of OA: 
The Framingham Knee Osteoarthritis study is a population-based study of independently 
living elderly examining the prevalence of radiographic and symptomatic knee 
osteoarthritis. This group was assessed in the early 1980’s at which time they had been 
observed for over 35 years and many risk factors for osteoarthritis was ascertained. Results 
from this study suggest that knee OA increases in prevalence with age, more so in women 
than in men. The study also showed that obesity precedes and increases the risk of knee 
OA, especially in women. Other risk factors documented in this study included knee injury, 
chondrocalcinosis, occupational knee bending and physical labour. Radiographic knee OA 
was negatively associated with smoking. There was no clear cut relationship of 
osteoarthritis with oestrogen use in women. 
 
Who gets osteoarthritis and where does it occur? 
The most common sites are the hand (DIP joint and base of the thumb), knee, 
hip, 1st metatarsophalangeal joint, and apophyseal and intervertebral joints 
of the cervical and lumbar spine. This distribution is probably related to pressure 
distribution with bipedalism. In spinal disease, there is a lack of correlation between 
pain and radiographic changes.  
The epidemiology of peripheral joint OA has shown that knee and hand disease 
tend to go together and is commoner in women than men. Hip disease has a 
roughly equal sex incidence. 
 
Classification of OA: 
Osteoarthritis may be classified into Primary or secondary OA.  
Primary OA is idiopathic and secondary OA is due to a preceding cause. 
 
 
 
Primary OA may be further classified into: 
1. Localised 
- 
Hands: DIP, PIP, first CMCJ usually involved 
- 
Feet - MTP’s and interphalangeal joints of the big toes 
CHANGES IN THE JOINT IN OA: 
1.Subchondral Bone 
hypertrophy, remodelling 
2.Cartilage 
degradation and repair  
3.Synovium 
chronic inflammation  
 
4.Capsule 
fibrosis, thickening 
 
 


--- page 3 ---
- 
Knees 
- 
Hip 
- 
Spine 
2. Generalised 
Involving 3 or more joint areas. 
 
Secondary OA may be due to various causes such as: 
- 
Trauma / surgery 
- 
Anatomical / development: such as Perthe’s disease 
- 
Metabolic or endocrine abnormalities such as acromegaly 
- 
Inflammatory causes 
 
Symptoms and signs of OA: 
Joint pain is poorly localized, usually assymetric and initially episodic. Initially 
pain occurs with activity, and later, even at rest. Joint stiffness is common, 
usually lasts less than 30 minutes and is more marked after a  period of 
immobility. Functional changes include reduced walking or walking with a limp, 
difficulty with steps etc. 
 
The findings on clinical examination include the following: 
• 
Palpable crepitus on movement of the joint. 
• 
Bony enlargement of the joint 
• 
Reduction in the range of movement with pain at the extremes of 
movement. 
• 
Ligamentous laxity, instability and deformity may occur. 
• 
Muscle weakness. 
• 
Signs of inflammation, synovial thickening or joint effusions may occur 
intermittently 
 
Radiographic features: 
1. Joint space narrowing  
2. Marginal osteophytes  
3. Subchondral sclerosis  
4. Bone cysts 
 
Risk factors for osteoarthritis: 
The risk factors for OA may be intrinsic such as age, sex, race, family 
history and obesity or extrinsic such as shape and stability of a joint, 
injury or abuse of a joint and loss of movement. 
We know that OA is commoner in older people, but what aspect of ageing is 
important, has not been identified. The importance of race and family history 
point to genetic factors. Obesity is a major risk factor for knee and hand 
osteoarthritis but not for hip disease. 
 
Genetic factors and osteoarthritis 
A cardinal feature of OA is the progressive disruption of the articular cartilage 
of which type II collagen is a major constituent. Family studies of members 
with polyarticular OA has shown a discrete abnormality in the collagen 2A 
gene. There was a single base mutation in the type II procollagen gene (COL 
2AI) with cysteine in place of arginine at position 519 in the alpha 1 chain. 
Thus, these findings confirm the clinical observation that heredity plays a role 
in the aetiology of OA. However, these genetic abnormalities probably 
account for only a small proportion of patients with OA. In contrast to 
diseases like RA where there is a genetic predisposition to develop the 
disease, the genetic defect identified in OA represents the disease process 
itself. 
 
Identification of a genetic defect as a cause of primary  OA leads to possible 


--- page 4 ---
new therapeutic interventions such as gene manipulation. Development of 
probes for early detection of gene defects in families will lead to early 
identification of those at risk, and they could be counselled about occupational 
choices.  Those who have a normal gene composition could be reassured. 
 
Osteoarthritis and ageing: 
Age-related changes in joint biomechanics due to changes in the structural and 
functional properties of cartilage are of importance in the pathogenesis of OA. 
However, available data do not permit the conclusion that OA is due to biological 
ageing of the articular cartilage. A reduction in the cohesiveness of the matrix 
could constitute an age-linked risk factor. 
 
Ageing is a risk factor in the inception of OA in association with other aetiological 
factors eg. injury, inflammation, metabolic disturbance etc. However, ageing is the 
most prominent risk factor as the prevalence of OA  increases with age. 
Biologically and structurally cartilage from patients with OA differs from aged 
cartilage. 
 
Prevention of OA: 
1. Control weight: Obesity is clearly a risk factor for developing osteoarthritis. If you 
are a healthy weight , maintaining that weight may be the most important thing 
you can do to prevent OA 
2. Exercise: If the quadriceps muscles are weak, research shows you have an 
increased risk of painful knee OA. Fortunately, even relatively minor increases in 
the strength of these muscles can reduce the risk. 
3. Avoid injuries to the joint: Suffering a joint injury when you are young, 
predisposes you to developing OA later on in life. Therefore, avoidance and 
prompt treatment of joint injuries is important. 
4. Eat right: Certain nutrients are associated with a reduced risk of the disease or 
its severity eg. Omega-3 fatty acids, Vitamin D supplements. 
 
Management of Osteoarthritis: 
Management of osteoarthritis requires a holistic approach to treatment which includes 
pharmacological, non-pharmacological and surgical modalities. 
 
Non-pharmacological management includes: 
 
1. Social and psychological aspects: 
- 
Education and counselling is important to improve coping skills, manage stress and 
develop insight into the disease process. 
 
2. Physical modalities: 
- 
These include application of heat hydrotherapy, paraffin baths, ultrasound, shortwave 
or microwave dithermy and application of ice. 
 
3. Exercise: 
- 
Muscle strengthening exercises, improving and maintaining joint range of movement, 
to help maintain activity. 
 
4. Joint protection: 
- 
Weight reduction 
- 
Use of assistive devices such as walking aids, splints, orthotics, appropriate shoes, 
knee braces 
- 
Use of bath seats, mobile shower heads, large tool grips and handles. 
 
Pharmacological therapy: 
This includes analgesia such as paracetamol, tramadol and NSAID’s. Non-steroidal anti-
inflammatories should be used with caution in the elderly and in patients with co-morbidities 


--- page 5 ---
as it may cause gastropathy and nephrotoxicity. NSAID’s provide symptomatic relief, they 
have no effect on the underlying disease process. 
Oral corticosteroids have no role in the management of OA.Intra-articular steroid injection 
helps to provide pain relief especially if there is inflammation.  
 
Surgery: Surgical measures are indicated if symptoms progress despite pharmacological 
and non-pharmacological measures and if the arthritis is severe enough to impair mobility 
and impact quality of life. 
Surgical treatment may include:  
- 
Arthroscopic debridement of cartilage and joint space washout 
- 
Joint replacement 
- 
Osteotomy- is rarely performed 
- 
Arthrodesis  
 
QUIZ: 
A 65 year old woman presents with severe knee pain and difficulty walking. Her 
symptoms are worse when mobilsing and has progressed over the past one year. 
Radiographs of the knee joint reveal marked joint space narrowing and 
osteophytes. 
 
1. What is the diagnosis ? 
2. What are the characteristic clinical features of this condition ? 
3. What are the radiographic features of this condition? 
4. What are the risk factors ? 
5. What are the non-pharmacological treatment modalities? 
6. What are the mechanisms of joint pain in this condition? 
 
A 71 year old man complains of pain and swelling of the hand joints. He has early 
morning stiffness lasting approximately 20 minutes. On clinical examination he is 
found to have bony swelling of the distal interphalangeal and proximal 
interphalangeal joints ? 
 
1. What is the most likely diagnsosis 
2. How do you classify this condition? 
3. What is the relationship between osteoarthritis and ageing? 
 
 
