--- page 1 ---
1 
 
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 
Introduction 
• 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE of UNKNOWN AETIOLOGY.  
• 
RA is a CHRONIC, SYMMETRICAL, INFLAMMATORY, EROSIVE POLYARTHRITIS. It 
has a predilection for the wrists, and the small joints of the hands and feet, but larger 
joints may also be involved.  
• 
RA is associated with a WIDE spectrum of extra-articular manifestations.  
• 
A rheumatoid factor (RF) test or anti-citrullinated protein antibody (ACPA) is positive in 
about 70-80% of patients.  
• 
In the majority of patients, the course of RA is one of EXACERBATIONS and 
REMISSIONS 
• 
INFLAMMATION is the hallmark of RA:   INFLAMMATION  X  TIME  = JOINT 
DESTRUCTION 
Thus the target of terapy is to reduce inflammation in the shortest possible time to prevent 
joint destruction. 
Aetiology 
The cause of RA is unknown and is due to an interaction between genetic and environmental 
factors. 
a) GENETIC FACTORS 
• 
There is an increase in the prevalence of RA in monozygotic twins and dizygotic 
twins, and in families of patients with RA.  
• 
The most significant genetic risk factors for RA are variations in the human 
leucocyte antigen (HLA) class II genes, especially the HLA DRB1 gene. Early 
studies showed a significant association with the HLA-DR4 antigens in 
Caucasians, and a similar increase in the prevalence of HLA-DR4 occurs in 
African blacks in South Africa. However, in other populations, there is an 
association with different haplotypes 
• 
The “Shared epitope” - a sequence of five amino acids, is common in the different 
haplotypes and is considered to confer susceptibility 
• 
Other genetic associations reported include the PTPN22, PAD14 and STAT4 
genes. 
 
b) ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS 
• 
Hormones: The role of sex hormones in RA, is shown by the increased prevalence 
of 3:1 in females, and the observation that the disease goes into remission in most 
patients during pregnancy. However, the specific mechanisms involved are poorly 
understood. 
• 
Smoking: There is a link between smoking and the development of RA, and 
smokers tend to have more severe disease 
• 
Periodontal infection is associated with an increased risk of developing RA 
• 
Gut microflora: There is an imbalance in the gut microflora in RA. Partial 
restoration of the flora occurs in patients who show a response to therapy.  
Epidemiology 
• 
RA occurs in populations all over the world, and prevalence of 1% in most Caucasian 
populations.  
• 
A lower prevalence of 0.2% to 0.5% is reported in rural communities and developing 
countries. 


--- page 2 ---
2 
 
• 
Epidemiological studies in South Africa in African blacks -lower prevalence of 0.12% in a 
rural community compared to a prevalence of 0.90% in an urban African black population.  
• 
The female tomale ratio is 3:1 
• 
Most common age of onset is between 35 – 50 years  
Pathology 
• 
The synovium is primary site for pathological changes in RA.  
• 
The synovium consists of a surface layer of cells (intima) which are mainly macrophages 
and fibroblasts-like synoviocytes. The subintimal layer consists of blood vessels, fat cells, 
fibroblasts and few lymphocytes and macrophages. 
• 
In RA, there is marked proliferation of the synovium due to infiltration by mainly chronic 
inflammatory cells (lymphocytes and plasma cells), resulting in the formation of folds in 
the synovium. There is hyperplasia (increase in the number of cells) and hypertrophy 
(thickening) of the synovium.  
• 
The inflamed synovium grows over the articular cartilage (“pannus”), resulting in thinning 
of the articular cartilage and exposure of the underlying bone.  
• 
As the inflammation progress, further damage to the underlying bone results in bony 
erosions. 
Pathological changes include inflammation of the pleura or pericardium, and blood vessels. 
Diagnosis 
As there are many different causes of arthritis, a single clinical finding or laboratory test does not 
establish a diagnosis of RA. The earlier criteria included the presence of nodules, erosive 
changes on x-rays or involvement of multiple joints. Therefore, there was a delay in diagnosis 
and initiation of effective therapy. The new  2010 criteria  enable early diagnosis and treatment.  
The criteria comprise 4 domains, and a total score of 6 or more permits a diagnosis of RA. As 
the hands are most commonly involved, there is a greater weighting for involvement of the 
metacarpophaleal (MCP) or proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints. 
Clinical features 
Symptoms and signs 
SYMPTOMS 
SIGNS 
 
Pain 
Swelling 
Stiffness (morning) 
Fatigue 
Limitation of movement 
Deformity 
Weakness 
 
Tenderness  
Swelling 
Signs of inflammation 
Limitation of movement 
Deformities of joints 
• 
The joint involvement is usually polyarticular (>4 joints), but may be oligoarticular at onset.  
• 
The wrists, MCP and PIP joints of the hands and metatarsophhalangeal joints of the feet 
are most commonly involved, but the knees, ankles, elbows and shoulders may also  be 
involved.  
• 
Joint stiffness is most severe in the morning and lasts more than an hour during active 
disease, and improves with control of inflammation.    
 
 
 


--- page 3 ---
3 
 
 
THE 2010 AMERICAN COLLEGE OF RHEUMATOLOGY /EUROPEAN LEAGUE AGAINST 
RHEUMATISM  
CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA FOR RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 
 
 
 
JOINT MANIFESTATIONS 
Cervical spine 
• 
Neck pain is common – usually related to concomitant cervical spondylosis or muscular 
in origin. 
• 
Atlantoaxial subluxation is a characteristic manifestation of RA. The odontoid peg is 
separated from the anterior arch of the atlas by a ligament and a bursa. Inflammation of 
the bursa can cause erosion of the odontoid peg and disruption of the ligament. As a 
result, there may be migration of the odontoid peg leading to compression of the spinal 
cord.  
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) 
The TMJ may be involved – patients complain of pain in the joint and there may be crepitus on 
movement 
Sternoclavicular joint and acromioclavicular joints 
There may be swelling or tenderness over the sternoclavicular joint. The acromioclavicular joint 
may be tender on direct pressure. 
Shoulders 
• 
Shoulder pain is common in RA and is most often due to rotator cuff tendinit 
• 
Patients complain of pain in the upper arm, worse at night, especially when lying on the 
side of the affected shoulder. On examination, there is a painful arc from 60 -120 degrees 
with the abduction of the arm, and pain on resisted abduction.  


--- page 4 ---
4 
 
• 
Synovitis of the shoulder joint results gradual stiffening, and reduction in the range of all 
the movements of the shoulder. 
Elbows 
• 
Inflammation of the superior radio-ulnar joint is associated with a reduction in pronation 
and supination of the forearm. Crepitus may be present over the superior radio-ulnar joint. 
• 
Synovitis of the elbow leads to boggy swelling over the elbow joint. Patients may have a 
reduction of flexion and extension of the elbow with a fixed flexion deformity.  
• 
Swelling around the elbow joint may also be due to olecranon bursitis. 
Wrists 
• 
Boggy swelling over the dorsum of the wrist due to involvement of the radiocarpal joints. 
• 
Inflammation around the ulnar styloid leads to protrusion of the ulnar styloid. When the 
ulnar head is depressed, it springs back like a piano key – the ‘piano-key’ sign.  
• 
Synovitis around the protruding ulnar styloid can lead to rupture of the extensor tendons 
of the ring and little fingers.  
• 
Swelling of the wrists can cause compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel – 
resulting in carpal tunnel syndrome.  
• 
The flexion and extension of the wrists may be reduced. 
Hands 
• 
The most common finding is swelling and tenderness of the MCP and PIP joints. Patients 
complain of prolonged morning stiffness and are are unable to flex their fingers fully. 
• 
In the absence of swelling in the early stages, the compression of all the MCP joints, will 
result in tenderness – the ‘MCP squeeze test’.  
• 
Wasting of the interosseous muscles  
• 
Flexor tenosynovitis is diagnosed by crepitus or nodules along the  flexor tendons, and 
inability to fully flex the fingers. The presence of larger fibrotic nodules is associated with 
a ‘trigger finger’. 
• 
Other findings include subluxation at the MCP joints, ulnar deviation of the fingers, swan-
neck deformity, boutonniere (button-hole) deformity and Z-shape deformities of the 
thumbs.  
Hips  
• 
The hips are usually normal in early RA and are affected with uncontrolled disease 
activity. There is a history of hip pain and difficulty with walking.  
• 
On examination, the range of movement is limited.  
• 
Radiographs show the presence of joint space narrowing, and in some patients, there is 
medial migration of the femoral head – referred to as ‘protrusio acetabuli’.   
• 
Patients on long term term corticosteroids are at risk of developing avascular necrosis of 
the hips. 
Knees 
• 
Inflammation of the knees is common, and large effusions may be present. 
• 
With severe inflammation, a popliteal cyst may develop at the back of the knee. The 
popliteal cyst may rupture into the calf and produce severe pain which mimics a deep 
vein thrombosis. 
• 
Wasting of the quadriceps muscles 
• 
Laxity of the collateral ligaments results in joint instability and a valgus or varus deformity.  
• 
Reduction in the range of movement with a fixed flexion deformity   


--- page 5 ---
5 
 
Ankles, subtalar and midtarsal joints 
• 
Pain, swelling and limitation of movement is associated with difficulty in walking.  
• 
Periarticular swelling around the ankles may be due to tibialis posterior or peroneal 
tenosynovitis.  
• 
A valgus deformity of the ankle, can progress unless there is modification of footwear.  
• 
Involvement of the subtalar and midtarsal joints results in reduced mobility of these joints. 
Feet 
• 
In the early stages – there is tenderness on compression of the metatarsal  heads – the 
‘metatarsal squeeze test’. 
• 
MTP joint swelling results in separation of the toes and widening of the forefoot.  
• 
Dorsal subluxation of the MTP joints results in clawing or hammer-toe deformities. 
• 
Hallux valgus deformities   
• 
Callus forms on the sole of the foot due to pressure of the metatarsal heads during walking  
• 
Crowding and overriding of the toes results from continued  use of tight fitting footwear.   
Extra-articular manifestations of RA 
1) SKIN 
a) Subcutaneous nodules  
• 
firm nodules commonly occur over the extensor aspects of the upper forearm, 
pressure points such as tendons of the fingers, knees, Achilles tendon and 
olecranon bursae.  
• 
histological appearance of a nodule consists of a central necrotic layer, 
surrounded by a dense layer of macrophages and fibroblasts arranged radially 
and an outer fibrotic layer. 
b) Vasculitis – vascular inflammations leads to ischaemic lesions close to the nail folds 
2) EYE 
a) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca  
• 
Most common ocular manifestation 
• 
Have dryness, itching, grittiness or feeling of sand in the eyes 
• 
Reduced tear production and  
• 
Artificial tears used to prevent damage to the cornea.  
b) Episcleritis is inflammation of the superficial layer of the sclera – the eyes are red but 
there is no discharge. It does not affect vision 
c) Scleritis is  
• 
Inflammation of the deeper layers of the sclera 
• 
Eye is red and painful -referral to an ophthalmologist is mandatory  
• 
Treatment with topical and oral steroids.  
• 
Thinning of the sclera can result in scleromalacia perforans (perforation of the 
eye) 
3) LUNGS  
a) Pleural effusion  
b) Interstitial lung disease 
c) Obliterative bronchiolitis 
d) Nodules in the lung – rare 
e) Pulmonary nodules in association with pneumoconiosis (Caplan’s syndrome) 
4) HEART 
a) Pericarditis is uncommon 
b) Endocardial involvement may rarely be  associated with valvular heart disease 
c) Premature /accelerated atherosclerosis due to  chronic inflammation –results in 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease 


--- page 6 ---
6 
 
5) NEUROLOGICAL 
a) Atlanto-axial subluxation associated cord compression 
b) Carpal tunnel syndrome 
c) Mononeuritis multiplex 
d) Peripheral neuropathy 
6) HAEMATOLOGICAL 
a) Normocytic normochromic anaemia – due to chronic inflammation - it is common with 
active disease and improves with control of disease activity 
b) Microcytic hypochromic anaemia -  with use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
c) Throbocytosis – associated with disease activity 
7) VASCULITIS 
a) Cutaneous vasculitis 
b) Mononeuritis multiplex 
c) Mesenteric arteritis 
8) SPLENOMEGALY AND LYMPHADENOPATHY 
Felty’s syndrome – splenomegaly with neutopaenia and leg ulcers 
Lymph node enlargement in region of inflamed joints 
INVESTIGATIONS 
Tests to support the diagnosis 
1)  Rheumatoid factor is positive in 70-80% of patients with RA 
2) Anti-citrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) is a more specific test for RA and may be 
positive when the RF is negative. 
3) X-rays of the hands and feet 
Markers of inflammation  
1) ESR 
2) C-reactive protein 
NB: Anaemia and thrombocytosis are also present with active disease and become normal 
with control of disease activity 
Tests for monitoring for safety / co-morbidities and toxicity 
1) Full blood count 
2) Urea and creatinine 
3) Liver function tests 
4) Hepatitis B and C serology and HIV test before initiating methotrexate therapy 
Radiographic changes 
1) Soft tissue swelling 
2) Juxta-articular osteoporosis 
3) Erosions at the margins of the joints 
4) Narrowing of the joint space 
5) Presence of deformities 
6) Ankylosis of joints 
MANAGEMENT OF RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 
1) 
CONFIRMATION OF THE DIAGNOSIS 
The initial step in the management of RA is to review: 
a) Symptoms ( pain, morning stiffness, swelling and fatigue) 
b) Signs ( number of swollen and tender joints) 


--- page 7 ---
7 
 
c) Laboratory tests to support diagnosis (RF, ACPA) and disease activity (ESR, CRP) 
d) Functional status  
e) X-ray changes 
Based on the above assessment, the diagnosis is confirmed using the classification criteria 
 
2) 
ASSESSMENT OF THE DISEASE ACTIVITY and PROGRESSION  
• 
History: Prolonged morning stiffness, fatigue 
• 
Examination: The number of joints which are swollen and tender 
• 
Laboratory markers: Raised ESR and C-reactive protein 
The progression of the disease  is based on   
• 
Increasing number of swollen and tender joints 
• 
Deterioration in the functional status  
• 
Increase in the extent of joint damage as assessed by the appearance of new 
erosions on x-rays. 
X-rays of the hands and feet are used to monitor the progress of the disease and monitor 
the extent  of damage to the joints  
  
3) 
PATIENT EDUCATION 
As RA is a chronic disease, patients need to have an insight into their condition to ensure 
adherence to therapy, regular monitoring and follow up. Some of the topics which are 
discussed include the following: 
a) Nature of the disease – cause, natural history, chronicity 
b) Emotional support 
c) Behaviour modification- role of rest, exercise, work 
d) Treatment – potential benefits, adverse effects, regular monitoring 
  
4) 
GOALS OF THERAPY 
The primary goal of therapy is to suppress inflammation, prevent joint destruction and 
restore normal activity. While this may be possible in patients with early disease, they will 
need to be modified in patients who already have severe disease with joint damage at 
presentation 
 
5) 
NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL MEASURES 
a) Physiotherapy 
The physiotherapists can assist with the control of pain and inflammation, help to 
preserve or improve function, prevent or correct deformities and assist with muscle 
strengthening and improving the range of motion of the joints. 
b) Occupational therapy 
Occupational therapy can assist with the provision of static or dynamic splints, advise 
about joint protecton techniques and activities of daily living 
c) Use of assistive devices 
Patients may benefit from the use of assistive devices for mobility e.g. walking stick or 
a walking frame 
d) Modification of footwear 
Footwear modification can prevent the progression of many of the deformities of the 
feet. 
 
6) 
PHARMACOLOGICAL MEASURES 
a) Analgesics e.g. paracetamol – provides pain relief for a few hours but does not have 
any effect on inflammation 


--- page 8 ---
8 
 
b) Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) e.g. ibuprofen, indomethacin, 
naproxen – they help to provide pain relief and reduce inflammation. However, they do 
not prevent further episodes of inflammation as patients experience new episodes of 
inflammation while on regular NSAIDS. 
Some of the adverse effects of NSAIDS are gastrointestinal erosions or ulceration, 
renal toxicity, cutaneous reactions, neurological , haematological and drug interactions.  
c) Corticosteroids 
• 
They are very effective in controlling inflammation but they do not alter the 
natural history and prevent flares of RA.  
• 
They are used initially as bridging therapy while awaiting the action of 
specific disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug therapy (DMARDS).  
• 
They may be administered by intra-articular or intramuscular injections or 
orally.  
• 
Once patients show a response to  DMARDS, the steroids should be tailed 
off or reduced to a low dose of 5mg/day.  
• 
Higher doses of steroids are required for some of the extra-articular 
manifestations 
• 
They are associated with a wide spectrum of side effects and must be used 
with caution in the elderly and patients with co-morbidities 
 
d) Disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDS) 
 
Please refer to Kumar and Clark text for further details on DMARDS – guidelines 
for their use, adverse effects and monitoring of therapy. 
 
DMARDS are used in all patients with active RA as they alter the natural history of RA 
and prevent recurrent flares of arthritis. They have a slow onset of action varying from 
4-12 weeks. They may be used alone or in combination with other DMARDS. 
 
** In South Africa we have a high prevalence of HIV, Hepatitis B and TB – thus prior 
to use of drugs such as methotrexate and biological agents, patients are screened for 
HIV and Hepatitis B and a CXR is also performed. 
 
i) 
Synthetic 
 The synthetic DMARDS include  
• 
methotrexate,  
• 
salazopyrine,  
• 
chloroquine and  
• 
leflunomide. 
They may be used alone or in combination with other DMARDS. 
 
ii) 
Biological 
TNF antagonists 
B cell targeted therapy 
IL-6 inhibitor 
CTLA4 blocker  
7) 
SURGERY 
a) Soft tissue surgery – such as flexor tenosynovectomy, carpal tunnel release 
b) Joint surgery – such as excision arthroplasty  or replacement arthroplasty 
 
8) 
SUMMARY 


--- page 9 ---
9 
 
A major challenge in the management of RA is to make a diagnosis EARLY and 
initiate DMARD therapy to suppress joint inflammation. Delays in diagnosis and 
referral, result in joint destruction, impact on the quality of life, development of co-
morbidities and premature mortality. 
SELF ASSESSMENT  
1) What are some of the important factors which increase the risk of developing rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA)? 
2) Which laboratory tests support a diagnosis of RA? 
3) Which laboratory tests indicate disease activity in RA? 
4) What are the changes in the hands which occur in RA? 
5) Which anatomical structures are affected in the joints of patients with RA? 
6) List the radiographic findings in RA. 
7) What are the clinical features of rotator cuff tendinitis? 
8) What are the important domains used to classify patients with rheumatoid arthritis? 
9) What Is the role of corticosteroids in RA? 
10) What are the common side effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory? 
11) What is the role of disease modifying anti-rheumatic  drugs (DMARDS) in RA? 
12) What are the common ocular manifestations of RA? 
13) List the features which support the presence of disease activity in RA? 
14) What are the consequences of delayed DMARD therapy in RA? 
 
 
 
