--- page 1 ---
As an outline for a kid kidney injury, we look at a clinical case, look at the epidemiology
of it, that's the definitions, classification, look at the presenting features of kid kidney
injury, what are the priorities, what are the clinical clues, and how to manage kid kidney
injury.
So with 24-year-old female who presents with a ruptured ectopic pregnancy, day after admission
her urine output reduces to about five months per hour, and the blood pressure initially
was about 18 or 40 millimeters of mercury, and it increases to about 150 or 100 millimeters
of mercury.
She has an elevated jugular venous pressure, she has got a galliparithm, bilateral cause,
lung repetitions, and she's together and a soccer.
So explain your approach and purpose is to develop an approach to a kid kidney injury.
In terms of the epidemiology, kid kidney injury is responsible between 5-10% of admissions
or general admissions, and approximately 20-25% of patients with sepsis develop a kid kidney
injury, and 50% of them are with septic shock to be in the AKI.
Half of all the ICU admissions have developed the AKI, and the mortality is between 20-60%
and once in ICU.
So the AKI is associated with longer hospital stays, more complications, and higher mortality.
There's an increasing risk of developing chronic kidney disease after one has developed an
episode of a kid kidney injury.
So what's the definition?
The syndrome characterized by a rapid fall of GFR, generally within hours to days, and
there's retention of nitrogenous wastes, and non-nitrogenous waste products on metabolism.
--- page 2 ---
There's disordered electrolytes, acid-base, and fluid homeostasis.
So looking at the staging classification, it's divided in the AKI when the three stages
based on the serum creatinine that you have, and the urine output.
So stage one, if your serum creatinine increases to more than 26, by more than 26 micromoles
per liter, then 48 hours for a more than 1.5 to 1.9 increase in overall serum creatinine,
or if your urine output drops by less than 0.5 miles per kilo per hour for more than
six hours, that is stage one.
Stage two, if your serum creatinine doubles, goes close to three times the reference serum
creatinine, or if your urine output drops for more than 12 hours, and stage three is if
your serum creatinine increases by three times the reference range, or if it's more
than 354 micromoles per liter, or the combination commences, kidney replacement therapy.
The urine output criteria is if you have a urine output of less than 0.3 miles per kilo
per hour for more than 24 hours, or if you annually for more than 12 hours.
So one of the goals of treating AKI is to identify patients early, when super interventions
can improve outcomes, is to consider multiple causes of kidney injury, and to anticipate
complications even before they might arise.
So what is the classification of AKI?
You can have pre-kidney AKI, you can have intrinsic AKI, you can have post-kidney AKI.
Looking at the pre-venal AKI, they reduce kidney blood flow leading to a reduction in
GFR. Common causes are someone has an acute hemorrhage, they volume depleted, they have
low cardiac output, they develop sepsis, if they've got chronic congestive cardiac failure
or cirrhosis, or if they're on vasomotor drugs, such as non-trivirals, even ACE inhibitors
--- page 3 ---
or ARVs, that can cause them to develop acute reduction of GFR.
Potentially reversible, and by restoring the blood flow to the kidney.
The intrinsic AKI is when there's kidney palentymal damage, and it occurs either damage
to the vasculature of the kidney, the merilide, or the tubular decision.
So ATN is probably the most common types of intrinsic AKI, and it's called, it's due to either
ischemic or diphrotoxic injury, maybe due to endogenous toxins, such as hemoglobin,
myoglobin, or myeloma, casts, it may be exogenous toxins, such as nephrotoxic agents, or drugs,
or cranial contrast. The recovery may occur if adequate supported measures are placed early on.
And the tube interstitial nephritis can cause the tube interstitial damage,
but acute domain refritus can also cause an intrinsic AKI.
Terms of the vascular causes can be due to an inflammation of the blood vessels or vasculitis,
could be to thrombosis within the blood vessels, or any severe hypertensive emergencies,
which can cause intrinsic kidney injury. This is the picture of what you're looking at.
In the intrinsic AKI, the glomerulus can be damaged, and acute domain refritus can have
blood supply problems with the thrombosis or the vasculitis inflammation,
or you can have damage to the tubules, either the interstitial interstitial and the tubules,
because of interstitial nephritis. Post renal AKI is due to obstruction of
urinary flow from any cause, and what happens is that you're increasing black
backflow that reduces your tubular function, and because at any level of the urinary tract,
if the obstruction is not relieved, it will lead to permanent structural
and functional damage to the kidney, such as any bladder of suction output can cause
or ureteral obstruction, if left untreated, will lead to the failing of both kidneys in the long term.
--- page 4 ---
So how would one prevent AKI? In many cases, can be prevented early or reversed early,
if you look at who's at risk, and people at risk of AKI, those with increasing age,
they've got preexisting chronic kidney disease, if they've had surgery,
they've got diabetes, if they've prone to volume depletion, they had vomiting, diarrhea, or burns,
they've got RV dysfunction, if they've got cirrhosis, or if they have any drugs that can cause
vasomotor changes, such as your nonsteridosis, ACE inhibitors, or ARBs, if they have
genres in any other systemic conditions, such as multiple biloma, they are prone to developing AKI.
So looking at the nephrotoxins that can cause AKI, but let us look at the nonsteridosis,
your cox-trane emitter, it could be your diuretics, your ACE inhibitors, ARBs, especially
in your volume-depleted patients, patients who are volume-depleted, they should not be on these
agents. In terms of antibiotics, the common drugs that can cause AKI are immunoplasticicides,
and your vancomycin, amphotericin, beans, antifungal, to the nephrototic agent,
chemotherapy agents such as cisplastid, and IV contrast, these are all your nephrotoxic
agents that can make you prone, or make patients prone to AKI. So how do you reduce the
perioperative risk in patients from developing AKI? First of all, you have to hydrate them
adequately, to remove all the different toxins that they might be on, to review their volume
status and the kidney function, is to optimize the volume status, pre-optivity, and to review
their daily weights, they intake an output to chance for urine, to control the GM's in diabetics,
is to optimize the nutrition, is to capitalize patients who possibly may have any obstruction,
and is to avoid surgery immediately after a contrast admission, or IV contrast admission,
and is to reduce anti-aputensives in the early post-operative period. Do not keep anti-aputensives,
especially if someone's post-operative. What are the presenting features of acute
--- page 5 ---
renal failure, one has a rise of serum urea and creatinine into a uni, but the most important
on the earliest change is the reduction in urine output. So anybody who has a reduction
urine output, this will precede urea and creatinine going up. So you have to look for volume depletion,
or sometimes volume overload, if patients become unable to pass urine, they'd wear a parme deema,
they become hyperkilemic, because they're prone to arrhythmia as a cardiac arrest,
and they have become nonspecifically ill. Any deterioration of patients become nonspecifically
worse, one is to consume the diagnosis of acute kidney, or acute renal failure.
So when you're doing an unwanted patient, one is to look for the kidney function,
and the cine potassium, you have to look for a falling urine output and urea,
if they have persistent nausea and vomiting, they've got transiness, so impaired consciousness,
they've got signs of systemic sepsis, they've got evidence of severe hypertension,
or hypoattention, only they have family edema or peripheral edema or metabolic acidosis.
So the question sometimes happens is why is this acute kidney injury,
it was a chronic kidney disease, generally sometimes difficult to make a distinction,
but one can make that by looking at the previous kidney function tests,
if you do an ultrasound kidneys, commonly in long-standing kidney disease,
you have kidney sizes which become shrunk between less than 9, 10 centimeters,
but this is not true for diabetics, we have normal kidney size, even if the kidney function
is reduced. So the laboratory findings are not always helpful, presence of anemia may be acute,
or it may be chronic, and the presence of the calcium and phosphate may often not help
between determining whether it's acute or chronic kidney disease. So one of the priorities of the
kidney injury is to make the patient safe, look after the airway, they're breathing and they're
--- page 6 ---
circulation. So one of the potassium managed to manage hypokalemia urgently,
look at the volume status, are they overloaded, are they dehydrated,
doing urine dipsticks, you look for a reversible cause, and quite often,
pre-kidney injury looks at sepsis, look for any other predisposing factors,
look at the hemodynamic status, you can do invasive monitoring,
they've got dehydration such as central venous pressures. For post-kidney, you look
for they have a powerful bladder or urine sac symptoms, they have imageuria,
a range of urgent ultrasound to exclude obstruction, and you review their drug charts,
so you stop nephrotoxic agents, and you stop a title of why they do contrast their mission,
administration. So one of the clinical clues for pre-kidney A.K.I. on history, you can see
anybody who's got a reduction of reduced intervascular volume, maybe either dehydrated,
they have evidence of heart failure or sepsis, clinically you have to look at their blood
pressure, their heart rate, the peripheral perfusion, the jugular venous pressure,
presence of peripheral and palae edema, and their urine output. For intrinsic kidney disease,
it may be large in kidney visceral disease, they have a history of cardiovascular disease,
are they hypertensive, diabetic, who have a problem with hypokalestrelemia, do they have a
previous application, peripheral vascular disease, any stroke or is giving heart disease,
have they had any recent interventions such as invasive or endovascular changes,
have they had a stem fleascente or surgery, and you examine them for the presence of
itsopropylation, missing palaces, presence of a large heart, presence of gluise,
pediatric aneurysms, or ischemic toes. If you look at the small kidney vessels and
can very light the history, therefore the previous lecture was one of the remaining
--- page 7 ---
Fridays, a history of throat or skin infections, do they have fever or night sweats, systemic
features, an examination, do they have a rash, blood pressure increased, and we look for evidence
of systemic involvements such as uveitis, ulcers or connective tissue disease,
investigations, do they have blood or protein in the urine. For the tubular
intercession, it's commonly drugs that could cause systemic infections or diseases such as
sarcoid, examination, you look for secondary features such as fever, rash or bruising,
and investigations, the typical clue is the presence of eosinophilia,
on urine microscopy or the peripheral smear, or sometimes blood.
The post-kidney causes, one is to look at the lower, urine lower units,
symptoms, look at the evidence of prostatic disease in elderly males, presence of cancers,
and hematuria, that's a patient who has a pathobublata or any present hematuria,
and investigation is an early ultrasound, which is essential. So the urine analysis may help in
terms of AKI, and it may indicate a glomerular arthritis or intransic kidney disease, especially
in this blood, this perfect red blood cells, red blood cell path, or if there's a UTI that can
cause severe dysfunction, it's end of a mainstream urine for microscopy and culture,
it says the protein urea that's been excreted, and generally urine and electrodes are not
really helpful in assessing for you in AKI. If you look at the blood test,
sometimes you can have reduced hemoglobin, if there's hemolysis of bleeding,
the white cell count can be increased in infection, presence of eosinophilia suggests
achieving institutional arthritis, the reduced white cell count suggests sepsis, reduced
platelets, maybe due to a DIC or a Tumbo, Tumbo, Tumbo cytopridic perpyrra,
peripheral smear, you look for fragmented dead blood cells, and if there's a problem with
--- page 8 ---
liver disease, they may have a clotting abnormalities. In terms of biochemistry,
you can look at the urine and electrolytes, you look at your potassium level,
and your sodium is reduced if you upload all of your own excessive diuretics,
and the bicard is reduced in the presence of metabolic acidosis. In terms of microbiology,
you can send the blood cultures and urine, and ABG is indicated with a clinical deterioration
in your patient. So in assessing AKI, the imaging chest aches is important to exclude
primary edema, respiratory tract infections, looking at the cardiac size, the presence of
lymph nodes, or any cystic lesions, and the kidney ultrasound excludes obstruction,
if it's a sick obstruction, it's imperative to get an urgent ultrasound,
because the size of the kidney is so suggest that it's either chronic or acute kidney injury,
to less than 9 centimeters suggest that there is chronic kidney injury.
In terms of your volume replacement, so you need prompt volume-fuel replacement
for pre-kidney AKI if it is done early, but one has to ensure that the patient is not
overloaded because you can put them into primary edema, already overloaded. The types of fluids
that are used for pre-lanol, the dehydrated is your acetonic saline, crystalloids,
taking out your sodium bicarbonate, you try to restore the uvilemia, you assess this by looking
at the presence of tachycardia, you look at the structure of venous pressure, and look at the
urine output once you start fluids, and the central venous pressure line is important,
especially if they have sepsis, the cardiogenic shock of any other venous active
mitigations such as your adrenaline. Hypotelemia is treated, if it is more than 6
millimoles per liter, you require close cardi monitoring, and one has to do an ECG and know
the features of hypotelemia and ECG, quite often it progresses from peak T waves,
--- page 9 ---
you're flattening of your P waves, you have prolonged PR interval, your QRS,
you know, widens, and you develop a sine wave which is feed terminal, and it terminates in
ventricular fibrillation, or acystolic cardiac arrest. It's quite often here is what they see
the potassium levels look like, normal, they get your peak T waves, then you get your
prolongation of your QRS complex, you get a sine wave, which is a free terminal event.
How would you manage hypokalemia? You could give the patient calcium carbonate,
and it's a 10 moles, 10% solution, over 2 to 5 minutes, you can give them insulin glucose,
but you have to monitor the sugars after you've given the insulin glucose,
you can use sodium bicarbonate, if that's the toxic, if they're volume depleted,
you can have different concentrations, and you can give it over 15 to 60 minutes,
but if they are not responsive to any of these three measures, one has to consider dialysis,
especially if the kidney function is not improving, and your potassium continues to rise.
So in terms of pulmonary edema, one will stop all its venous fluids,
the patient on oxygen, put them on diuretics, you can give them more opiates or morphine for
some mild relief, show that they propped up, and quite often if they're unresponsive to any
the diuretics, unresponsive, one has to consider the dialysis and ventilation.
In terms of your hypophosphatemia, which is the likely increase in bleptomyelosis,
one can put them on dietary restriction, and oral phosphate binders and dialysis,
similarly in hypochalsemia, one has to put a look at the oral replacement for the vitamin D,
and as well as calcium, hypochalemia, you had one has to consider two-minute toxins. So hypomegizemia
is associated with hypochalemia and hypochalemia, so unless you correct the magnesium,
which has to be in the calcium will not correct. In terms of your metabolic acidosis, there's a
--- page 10 ---
high-end metabolic acidosis in AKI, and if it is severe, consider that the patient may have
a lactic acidosis, and salicylate, methanol, ethylene glycol poisoning, and if you consider
them for dialysis, the pH drops to 7.1 or less. The other strategies, the general strategies that
to treat anemia, to consider bleeding as a cause or amolysis, treat infection, maintain adequate
nutrition because they're hypercatabolic, especially the sepsis and the sepsis,
and you would consider energy and protein, look at the energy and protein requirements for
nutrition. So kidney replacement therapy is in the form of either emo dialysis or peritoneal dialysis,
the indications for kidney replacement therapy are persistent hypochalemia,
the presence of part of theemia, which is refractory to diabetics,
intractable acidosis, presence of oligo and urea, patient has a unemic pericarditis,
or unemic in kifanopathy, that's the indication to start acute dialysis.
Looking at the case again, we have 24-year-old female, it presents with a
ruptured ectopic pregnancy. The day after admission, the eulon output drops,
and the blood pressure was initially 80 of a 40, which increases. She has an elevated JVP
Galliparithin, biochal cause reputation, so she has developed fluid retention,
she initially probably was inadequately dehydrated, the kidneys have NASA to shut down,
you look at possibly an intrinsic cause, it initially was pre kidney cause,
because of hypovilemia, but now the kidneys have shut down because of damage to the
cubials, she developed a tubular injury, looking at the patients, it may probably require
hypnodialysis to relieve her symptoms.
