--- page 1 ---
ready for the song.
Go back to first thing.
Oh, it's on here, it's on the first thing.
This thing came out again, I'm going to show it on.
It's on the spider.
Let's start.
Okay, this is the lecture on chronic kidney disease.
I'm Dr. Hari Prasad from the Department of
Technology.
So let's look at the scenario.
You're consulting a 49 year old patient with history of
type two diabetes for the past eight years.
The hypertension for 10 years and HIV diagnosed five years ago.
Splat pressure is elevated at about 180 over 110 millimeters of mercury.
The GM is 12 and if you're in a dipstick,
show three pluses protein and a trace of blood.
What we would like you to do is to develop an approach to CKD.
So as an outline, we look at what is chronic kidney disease.
We look at the different stages.
Look at the pathogenesis, the communist causes in South Africa.
Look at how you would diagnose CKD.
How would you appropriately investigate it?
When you would refer for specialist care, how you would prevent the progression,
now you would generally manage the early and advanced stages of CKD.
So what is chronic kidney disease?
It's basically an abnormality of kidney structure and function
that is present for more than three months.
So it has to be there for more than three months.
So an abnormality of function means that the EGFR is less than 60
--- page 2 ---
miles per minute and an abnormality of structure means that this abnormal urine
means you have a protein clapping ratio that is raised.
We have blood in the urine for more than three months.
Or it could be due to structural abnormalities such as abnormal imaging.
In some cases, the patients may have genetic disease,
such as polycystic kidney disease, which makes it chronic.
Or they might have a previous biopsy that had proven histopathological disease.
So a normal kidney is about 10 to 12 or about 12 centimeters in size
has good function and it is smooth in outline and very low protein excretion.
But as one develops chronic kidney disease, the kidney becomes shrunken
and it is advanced when it is less than 9 centimeters,
the surface becomes granular, the EGFR drops and you have a higher protein excretion
from the kidney.
So the prevalence of chronic kidney disease in South Africa is estimated to be approximately
10%. That's of the adult population in this country.
We do expect doubling of the numbers of CKD in the next decade.
It is basically under-recognized and under-treated within our communities
and its prevalence increases as you grow older.
So this is probably one of the most important slides.
We look at, first of all, how you would recognize chronic kidney disease.
We look at this differences in function.
Function represents EGFR if it's more than 90th grade 1.
Between 60 and 90 is grade 2, grade A.
3A is between 45 and 59, most per minute, grade 3B is between 30 and 44, most per minute.
Grade 4 is when you have quite advanced CKD when your EGFR drops to 15 to 29
and you have kidney failure when your EGFR is less than 15, most per minute.
In terms of structure, you have normal, slightly reduced,
slightly increased, and even in your urine, this is the levels.
It becomes moderately increased.
--- page 3 ---
These are the levels and it's severely increased.
Here's the levels here.
So we can study by a patient as being either low risk,
can satisfy them as being at moderate risk or high risk,
depending on the kidney function and the structure,
or we can classify them as being very high risk for once marked in grade.
So this is how we would study by where patients with chronic kidney disease lies.
So for every one patient who develops kidney failure,
there's at least 200 patients between stage 3 and stage 4,
and there's about 5,000 stage 1 or stage 2.
So what we generally see is the tip of the iceberg.
We don't really see vast populations of people who have not been diagnosed
or cheated as yet.
So what's the pathogenesis?
The pathogenesis is, you can have raised integrated pressure for the start.
What happens is your nephlons get destroyed,
the remaining nephlons have increased blood flow,
and the permeability increases.
Glomerulus eventually becomes damaged.
They are strained on the supporting cells or the mesangial cells.
There's protein urea leakage into the distal proximal tubules.
It's prophabetic, and you get tubular interstitial scarring,
chronic ischemic damage.
This is an electron microscopy picture of your glomerulus.
Your filtration system, and your tubular system.
So what are the most important causes of CKD in South Africa?
So hypertension.
20% of the other population has hypertension.
Close to 18% might have diabetes, mellitus.
--- page 4 ---
14% has HIV.
The rest have limited disease.
They use toxic drugs such as non-steroidal contrast or immunoglycosides.
They have a connective tissue disease such as lupus.
They have inherited causes such as polycystic kidney disease
or obstructive net property.
These causes represent the most common causes of CKD in South Africa.
So it's important when you have a patient to ask them about these different conditions.
So why would diagnosing CKD be important?
Because it increases your cardiovascular risk,
and it causes early mortality.
Patients with CKD have a high mortality,
mainly due to cardiovascular disease.
It empowers you to investigate the patient further,
sometimes in the chylenobarpsy.
So you can determine the cause,
and to also slow the progression with specific treatments.
You can recognize complications that require such as anemia and bone disease.
And at the worst stage, prepare the patient for kidney replacement therapy.
So who do you scream?
Anybody with the known risk factors we mentioned?
Any person with unexplained edema,
congestive cardiac failure,
evidence of atherosclerosis,
either cerebral or cardiovascular.
Any person with the multi-system disease,
any person who's been on chronic nephrotoxins,
or any person later on your logical disease.
So why do we important to quantify the proteinuria?
--- page 5 ---
Because it's a marker of CKD.
The greater the protein excretion,
the greater the progression of your CKD.
And it's also a cardiac risk marker.
Some more protein you exclude,
the higher the chances are of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
So what is important to hypertension?
It is both a cause of CKD and a marker progression.
So hypertension develops as a consequence of CKD,
but it can be a cause of CKD.
And slowing or controlling the blood pressure
slows the progression of the chronic kidney disease.
What routine investigations do you do for CKD?
Basically, part of your clinical examination,
you subject the patient to urine lipsticks,
you do a urine microscopy,
you quantify the proteinuria,
doing either protein-crapping ratio,
or an albumin-crapping ratio.
You do a urine electrolytes,
looking at the estimated GFR,
you send the patient with ultrasound kidneys.
And if you don't know the cause,
quite often you can prefer the patient with a kidney biopsy.
So when do we refer for specialist K,
the EGFR is less than 30 miles per minute.
You have more than 500 grams per 24 hours of proteinuria.
When you've got urine in it,
that's a task-signifying underlying domain of arthritis.
--- page 6 ---
If you've got poorly controlled blood pressure
or more than four agents,
if the patient has persistently abnormal potassium,
serum potassium levels,
if there's evidence of inherited kidney disease
or recurrent stone disease,
these are the main indications
to refer a patient to a specialist K.
So what about the progression?
A certain one non-modifiable list factors
for the progression of CKD.
These include the underlying cause of the disease,
age of the patient, as well as the race.
A certain races that are more prone to certain diseases.
So one of the modifiable factors,
things that you can control in the blood pressure,
proteinuria excreted,
the use of nephrotoxic agents,
the disease activity,
the presence of obstruction or UTIs,
the presence of hypovolemia or any intercurrent illness,
presence of anemia or smoking,
or blood glucose in diabetics.
These are the things that can be
altered to improve the progression.
So if your proteinuria is not significant,
your blood pressure target should be about 13080.
If you have more than 150 milligrams of excretion per day,
blood pressure should be better controlled in diabetics.
--- page 7 ---
You prefer a lower blood pressure about 125,
should be individualized according to the age of the patients.
So which drug do we use?
We use ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-receptive blockers.
We reduce the blood pressure and proteinuria
with ACE inhibitors or ARBs,
also reduces the fibrosis and scarring of the kidney.
So the order of treatment would be a lube dietic
for salt and water overload in the patient,
subjecting to an ACE inhibitor or ARB,
then a calcium channel blocker,
then a beta blocker and then alpha blocker,
which can be added sequentially.
The other measures that we use are the use of statins
for dyslipidemia,
to control the hyperphosphatemia that occurs in CKD with diet,
phosphate binders.
We try to control anemia with ion supplementation
and retropoietin.
For aspirin, we use aspirin for cardiovascular risk.
We treat or avoid hypovolemia
in urinary tract obstruction and infections.
We stop the anti-diabetic agent midformin
when the GFR is less than 30,
and we try to avoid nonsteroidals
or any new contrast agents in patients
who are high risk progression.
In terms of diet,
we try to limit the meat protein from the patient
--- page 8 ---
to about 0.8 to 1 gram per kilo per day.
This itself reduces the progression of kidney disease.
The osteopation to stop smoking,
to limit the alcohol intake to less than three units per day,
to lose weight, to exercise and to get their vaccinations.
So in stage four and five,
which is your advanced disease,
we refer patients to a nephrology unit
and later referred to the worst prognosis
in terms of starting treatment and mortality.
And we optimize their calcium,
their phosphate and their BTH balances,
and we correct the acidosis.
So the patients with advanced CKD,
that means they've got probably stage five
or in stage kidney disease,
we restrict the water and the salt,
we restrict the fluids to the output
from previous day plus 500 moles.
Put them on frozen mite,
they're passing urine,
they monitor their daily weights.
And if they have persisted hyperkalemia,
which is a complication of end stage kidney disease,
give them dietary advice,
low potassium diet,
cases we have to stop the ACE inhibitors or ARBs,
which can make it worse.
So looking at some clinical case scenarios,
--- page 9 ---
we have a 65 year old male,
diagnosis of benign prosthetic hypertrophy.
So what symptoms would they most likely present with?
Answer is yes, obstructive symptoms
are disposed stream, hesitancy, dysuria,
interrupted blood flow,
and incomplete bladder entity.
So in case two,
we have a 45 year old male who was discovered
to have stage one chronic kidney disease
on routine clinical examination.
How is he likely present?
Look at the previous lecture,
he would more than likely,
because of the early stages be asymptomatic.
Scenario three,
we have a 44 year old patient with chronic arthritis,
presents with chronic kidney disease.
So which class of drug
is the most likely to cause her disease?
Most likely answer is nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents.
Scenario four,
what are the neurological signs
of a 45 year old
who presents with end stage kidney disease?
The answer is,
if it's end stage,
they may have a euremic and careful property,
can have a sensory peripheral neuropathy
--- page 10 ---
or muscle for secretations.
So a 25 year old female is diagnosed
with chronic kidney disease,
name the criteria for a diagnosis
and the answer must be,
is present for more than three months on testing,
eGFR should be lower than 60 miles per minute,
and you have a race protein-clearing ratio,
and a persistent or a persistent either hematurian.
So a 70 year old with stage TCKD,
what is an estimated GFR?
If you look at the graph that's been provided,
the answer lies between 45 to 59 miles per minute.
Scenario seven,
16 seven year old patient diagnosed with CKD,
name four of the most likely causes,
in terms of commonality and what is common,
dishypertension, diabetes, HIV,
and chronic community ofitis.
These are the commonest causes.
