--- page 1 ---
Dr. Harry Prasad, the next lecture is on diegetic kidney disease.
So we have a clinical scenario to start, we have a 52 year old patient who presents to
casualty with tiredness, arthritis, passing very foamy urine, persistent tingling of their hands
and feet, as well as blood vision. Patient is diagnosed with diabetes mellitus for the past 12
years. She is overweight, blood pressure that's elevated of 160 over 90 and her GM is 23.
She has bilateral cataracts and a sensory neuropathy. She's got four glasses of protein,
no blood lipstick testing. So the purpose of the lecture is to develop a clinical approach
to patients such as this one. Looking at diabetic kidney disease, we look at the classification
of diabetes, brief slides from the epidemiology of diabetes, looking at the pathogenesis and
pathology that occurs, natural history of diabetic kidney disease, history, what you would look
for on history, on physical examination, how you would investigate, how you would diagnose
diabetic kidney disease and the slides on the lifestyle and medications that we use.
So the epidemiological classification of diabetes is basically a type one which is immunologically
mediated, a type two which is a majority of your diabetic patients. You can have numerous genetic
disorders and you can have gestational diabetes as part of the classification.
So there's more than half a billion people now with diabetes and the majority are in type two
--- page 2 ---
and there's also a small amount of gestational diabetes. There's numerous other causes and
there's different consequences of diabetes throughout the world. So what is the pathogenesis of a
diabetic nephropathy? It's basically broken on into the metabolic cause as a result of the
high glucose levels that patients have, leads to advanced glycation products.
It's hemodynamic changes in terms of your blood flows and pressures within your blood vessels.
You have vasoactive hormones such as angiotensin 2 and endothelium causing hemodynamic changes.
It's a release of inflammatory cytokines, TGF, beta and BGF. All of them combined to cause
increased extracellular matrix, increased vascular permeability and basically manifests as an
extracellular matrix accumulation and the presence of proteinuria and the kidney design vault.
So what are the complications of diabetes? You classify them as microvascular and
macrovascular. Your microvascular complications are your eye complications,
the kidney complications and the nerve complications, your neuropathies.
The macrovascular are your brain complications such as your heart attacks, your strokes,
your heart attacks that require the heart complications and peripheral vascular disease
in terms of your extremity complications. It's good to have an approach into the
microvascular and macrovascular complications of diabetes. You have a patient to run a few.
--- page 3 ---
So what is the characteristic feature of diabetic nephropathy? It's called
nogular chlamenolosterosis or chemistry of Wilson disease. What happens? You get
over it and not in the deposition of a cellular hereine matrix within the germaniness and
this surrounds the Byzantium of the capillary groups.
So diabetic kidney disease is basically an encompassing term for diabetic kidney disease
that is due to diabetes and includes your non-classical glomerular lesions as well as
severe decisional diseases and it is a clinical diagnosis. You can't really make this diagnosis
on a Bob scene. So if you look at diabetic kidney disease, classical diabetic nephropathy can occur,
that's your chemistry of Wilson disease, but that's part of the subgroup of your diabetes kidney
disease related disorders. So anybody who's got associated hypertension, can have hypertension
associated with it. They've got gout, they've got the changes of gout, they've got obesity,
you can have your obesity-related changes as they grow older and they're going to atherosclerosis
and dyslipidemia, all those forms an encompassing term for diabetic kidney disease.
Then you can have patients with diabetes with non-diabetic kidney disease that they can have,
doesn't stop them from having glomerular disease either primary or secondary,
having a secondary interstitial nephritis or inherited kidney disease and they can have
--- page 4 ---
an overlap between your diabetic kidney disease and your non-diabetic kidney disease in the same
patient. So what happens as a natural terms of the natural history? Initially you get hyperfiltration,
your EGFR will spike, you have a raised EGFR and with time in terms of the number of years,
EGFR tends to drop. After about 15 years of diabetes, it drops precipitously,
the chances of death from cardiovascular disease becomes markedly raised during this time. Similarly,
the protein urea will spike, stay silent as the disease progresses, a modern protein urea or
protein you excrete or tend to increase with time, it becomes an overt diabetic nephropathy
and this itself, the presence of a high protein urea, no GFR, increases the risk of cardiovascular
disease. So what is the natural history of diabetic kidney disease? Approximately 20 to 40 percent
of patients would type one and type two diabetes would develop diabetic kidney disease, close to
half of them will develop kidney disease and this clinical syndrome was characterized by the
presence of more than 3.3 grams of protein urea and a raised creatinine. Basically once
they develop kidney disease to into diabetes, then it is decline of the EGFR, they have raised
arterial blood pressures and they have increased cardiovascular mortality and mobility.
So looking at the different stages, initially they have no symptoms, stage two may be asymptomatic
stage three, they start to show some changes in terms of loss of protein, protein urea,
--- page 5 ---
develop puffiness, urinary tension, become stage four which is pre dialysis, they have
more symptoms, they have blood in the urine, they have acute breathlessness and stage five,
the kidneys have failed completely. So in terms of the history, it's important to know the history
regarding the diabetes, personal history, their family history and social history. What type of
diabetes is the type one and type two? How is a blood glucose control? Has it been good or poor?
What drugs did they use to control the blood sugars? What complications, the macro or
microvascular complications and what education the patient received? So you can ask them about
the history of glycemic control, what type of control do they use? What do they monitor their
sugars? They have hyperglise, I have a glycemic episode or hypoglycemic episodes.
Again, looking for the complications that I've mentioned, looking for retinal complications,
GI, musculoskeletal, infective as well as neuropsychiatric complications of diabetes.
We mentioned the macrovascular complications, coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease,
and peripheral vascular disease. Here's a slide on the changes that occur, you can get your
nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy, aneurysms, hemorrhages, and itchidates,
and you can get abnormal formation of blood vessels with a proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
So the presence of a proliferative diabetic retinopathy, then you've got eye changes,
--- page 6 ---
correlates with pathological features of diabetic kidney disease. That is, I is the window to the
kidney. If you've got diabetic retinopathy, more than likely implies you develop their diabetic
nephropathy. So clinical diagnosis of diabetic kidney disease can be inferred,
if you've got a established retinopathy, even if the duration has been short, and you have
persistently poor who glucose control, low blood pressure control, this is the likelihood of
diabetic kidney disease is much higher. So there are other causes of diabetes related kidney disorders,
it can be due to pepilin in the process, it can have renal vascular disease, that is,
you have a hardening of the arteries around the kidneys, it can have an urogenic bladder,
maybe diabetic systopathy, you have urinary tract infections causing kidney damage,
and you can be exposed to contrasts cause acute kidney injury. So diabetic kidney disorders are
not necessarily limited to the kidney itself, other causes as well. So what investigations do we do?
We look at the urinary sediment in the patient, gently it's bland, there's no blood in the kidney,
or the urine, and they're generally marked, out of the human urea, they have microscopic
human urea as it progresses, they tend to have a nephrotic range protein urea, and the presence
of dysbolic dead blood cells, dead blood cells are uncommon, and they suggest that they might be
in non-diabetic kidney disease, as mentioned, in terms of underlying prevention and arthritis
--- page 7 ---
as well. So this is a possibility in a patient, they can have more than one kidney disease,
they can have diabetic kidney disease, and a superimposed domain refractors on top of that.
It's one investigation that the baseline may measure the blood pressure,
examine the peripheral pulses, do a urine lipstick, looking for hematuria, looking for
casts, quantify the protein urea, do a protein exactly in ratio of 25 urine protein excretion,
look at the visual acuity and form of endoscopy, can test for a neuropathy,
look at the kidney function in terms of the uni, look at the EGFR,
quantify protein urea, look at the blood sugar control in terms of the HPA1C, and we do an
ultrasound on the kidney. These are your basic investigations with diabetic kidney disease.
How would we manage them? We do the usual for, as we looked at the hypertension, we can body
weights, we can ask patients to lose weight, stop smoking, improve their diets, and to increase
their physical activity. So this is basic changes, diabetes, hypertension, and CKD.
So how would you manage? You look at lifestyle changes, physical activity, protein restriction,
salt restriction, repeat patients, the agent of choices, ACE inhibitor, ARB again,
low with their glucose either with insulin, metformin, the newer agents are your HCl2 inhibitors,
that will be the drug for the future, and we provide them with cardiovascular protection.
--- page 8 ---
So we do, how do we monitor their sugars? We do intensive monitoring, look at the natural
history of the disease, where are they currently situated in terms of the protein urea and the
EGFR. We try to improve the blood glucose control. If you're not an insulin, your HPA1C should be
less than 7.5, on insulin it should be less than 6.5. The most important for diabetes is to try
to control the blood pressure. Target is generally 13080, we should aim for at least less than 120.
If you're protein urea, you should have a lower blood pressure, and we advise patients on
lifestyle changes as well. To manage the protein urea, if you've got protein urea more than
less than 0.5 grams per day, you start an ACE inhibitor or an ARB, try to control the blood
sugar. We draw metformin, if you're EGFR at less than 30, because it becomes nephrotoxic.
We try to intensively control the blood pressure, we treat dyslipidemia with the statin,
and we subject the patient again to protein restriction of less than 0.8 milligrams, we can
look at the... So, good blood pressure control in diabetes always improves the prognosis,
and it also helps to improve the protein excretion. So, when you have overt diabetic nephropathy,
you'll be losing 12 months per minute by year, and if you've got good blood pressure control,
it limits it to 5 months per minute by year, which is still a lot, but better than 12 months
per minute per year. The ACE inhibitor or ARB reduces the progression further,
--- page 9 ---
can increase into, or can reduce the progression to less than 0.3 months per minute per year.
The low salt diet helps of less than 5 grams per day, and we stepwise, we increase,
increase the ACE inhibitor or ARB, we add noob dilatix, non-dihydropylin, calcium channel
blockers, even beta blockers. So, when would you refer to nephrology? Someone has EGFR at less than
30, they've got high protein excretion, there's a rapid loss of kidney function,
they have resistant hypertension, or they suggest evidence of inflammatory kidney disease,
to your dead blood cell casts dysmorphia, dead blood cells in the urine, suggesting an
underlying permanent arthritis. Reduced sodium intake will always have patients with CKD,
hypertension or diabetes, and there's good quality evidence for cardiovascular disease,
there's wanted quality evidence for risk of stroke. However, the risk of progression of CKD,
evidence is weak, but it should be performed probably more for the other conditions as well.
So, what anti-appetensive and antibiotic earrings we use, we use ACE inhibitor or an ARB,
can use non-dihydropylin, calcium channel blocker, we can use immunorelicortic ligand agonists,
you can use beta blockers and statins, all of these have some anti-protic actions as well,
to protect your kidneys. So, we try to control the blood sugar based on the comorbidities of
the patients and newborns of the factors. So, we should try to aim for less than 6.5,
--- page 10 ---
we'll keep the range between 6.5 and 8. If you've got severe kidney disease,
try to increase the HPE1C. If you've got macrovascular complications,
you try to keep it in that range, few comorbidities will infer better sugar control,
but if you've got more comorbidities, infer a less control at least closer to 8.
It's like expecting to be short, you aim for a higher HPE1C, if you've got hypoglycemic awareness,
it's impaired, you aim for a higher HPE1C, and we look at other factors as well. So,
the range should be between 6.5 to 8. If you look at all of these factors,
how often or how tightly should the lactation of sugar control be?
We then develop, look at this scenario again, you've got a 52-year-old patient,
tiredness, proritus, passing fomeurine with persistent tingling of their hands and feet.
If you diagnose your diabetes, you've got a problem of overweight,
poorly controlled blood pressure, poorly controlled sugars, if you've got eye symptoms,
bilateral cataracts, or you've got a neuropathy, and they've got four pluses of protein in the
blood pressure. The next one that's provided should give you
