--- page 1 ---
So, the lecturers on drugs and the kidney, our index case is a 45-year-old diabetic patient
with osteoarthritis.
He's been admitted for a colonized angiogram because of suspected ischemic heart disease.
He has dehydration and he's on nonsteroidal drugs for his osteoarthritis, he's on an
asin inhibitor and two diuretics.
He develops acute kidney injury after the procedure.
At the end of this lecture, we would like you to know how to define a clinical approach.
So, the kidney has been over a play a crucial role in maintaining the overall health of
the patient by filtering the waste products and regulating fluid balance.
That's its essential physiological functions.
--- page 2 ---
There are certain medications, however, that can adversely affect the kidney function.
And this is a condition known as nephrotoxicity.
So, understanding the potential nephrotoxic effects of commonly prescribed drugs is essential
for medical professionals to ensure that there's patient safety and to ensure optimization
of treatment of outcomes.
So, let's look at some of them.
The first one is the amino glycosides.
These are antibiotics.
And a common example of that is gentamizing.
So, amino glycosides accumulate in the proximal tubules of the kidney with the interfere with
--- page 3 ---
protein synthesis and the disrupt cellular metabolism.
This damages the tubular cells, beginning to impair the electrolyte balance, reduces
your GFR, and potentially, the toxic especially can cause kidney injury.
Those are just reduced mandatory, especially if there's a lower E-GFR.
Ideally, you want to try to avoid drugs like gentamizing and somebody has a low GFR.
Staphrotoxic agent that's common needs a use of contrast agents, is used for diagnostic
imaging procedures.
The contrast agents can cause vasoconstriction of renal blood vessels that reduce blood flow
to the kidneys.
And this reduction in kidney blood flow leads to hypoxia and impaired tubular function, potentially
--- page 4 ---
as well leading to acute kidney injury.
The next, or the commonest group of drugs are an ethrotoxic by a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
use for pain management.
And prostaglandins play around in maintaining renal blood flow and sodium excretion.
And what nonsteroidal do is inhibit this prostaglandic synthesis.
The effect of which is to cause a reduction of kidney blood flow, cause a salt retention
as well as acute kidney injury.
Angiotensin and converting enzymes very commonly prescribe for lots of patients with high blood
pressure and with heart failure, and you can cause irreversible kidney dysfunction
by reducing kidney blood flow and pulmonary filtration.
--- page 5 ---
This effect is both pronounced in patients who already have preexisting kidney disease,
or if you're taking other medications that can affect the kidney blood flow.
Diuretics are used to promote fluid excretion, and they can act on different sites, so the
kidney needs to increase the excretion of water and electrolytes, but when there is excessive
diuresis, it leads to dehydration, which uses the blood flow further and impairs drug
or drug elimination.
So there's also electrolyte imbalances which can disrupt kidney function and contribute
to AKI.
So what are the risk factors for an ethrotoxic induced AKI?
First of all, the patient has preexisting kidney disease that is already have a GFR probably
--- page 6 ---
of less than 16 months per minute.
And these patients are at an increased risk of an ethrotoxic drug induced AKI because
of the reduced compensatory capacity.
Secondly, there's age, older adults are most susceptible to an ethrotoxic effects of the
age-related changes and because of their pharmacokinetics.
Thirdly, there's volume depletion.
When patients are dehydrated, they can have a potentiality of their ethrotoxic drugs,
and this reduces the blood flow and impairs drug elimination.
The use of concurrent medications, which are all ethrotoxic, increases when they are
used together and simultaneously in a patient.
--- page 7 ---
So if there's any underlying medical conditions such as diabetes or heart failure, they actually
increase the risk of an ethrotoxic drug induced AKI.
So what are the strategies that are used to minimize this?
First of all, it's patient education.
Educating patients about the potential and ethrotoxic effects of their medications and
encouraging them to report any signs of kidney dysfunction promotes early intervention.
Then you can individualize the dose.
You can adjust the dose based on the kidney function and the patient characteristics based
on the comorbidities, which helps to prevent excessive drug exposure and minimize nephrotoxicity.
The next measure is to look at monitoring the kidney function.
--- page 8 ---
So regularly monitoring kidney function, especially in IRS patients, such as your chrysium creatinine
and GFR, allows for the early detection of nephrotoxicity as well as the timely intervention.
The next factor is maintaining adequate hydration.
We discussed this by encouraging all the fluid intake, helps to maintain the kidney blood
flow and reduce the risk of drug induced AKI.
The last factor is the avoidance of concurrent nephrotoxic use.
When possible, try to alternate medications or reduce the dosage or try to avoid using
nephrotoxic agents altogether and it minimizes the cumulative nephrotoxic blood.
So let's look at our index case again.
We have a 45-year-old diabetic, someone who's already prone to developing nephrotoxic and
--- page 9 ---
use the AKI.
It's got osteoarthritis, it's already probably on non-steroidal agents, it's having a contrast
or a coronary angiogram, exposing to contrast some two diuretics and ACE inhibitor.
So when you use two diuretics, ACE inhibitor in this patient, you more than likely are
going to get a patient who's having nephrotoxic kidney injury and he does develop that.
So the approach is self-explanity, that's in the lecture.
There's one more.
So nephrotoxicity is a significant concern in clinical practice and medical professionals
that need to be aware of potential nephrotoxic agents that they use, commonly prescribed.
You have to understand the mechanisms of these drugs and how they cause nephrotoxicity, know
--- page 10 ---
the risk factors for patients, look at how to implement any preventative strategies
and you can try to optimize patients' medical regimens as well as to mineralize the risk
of kidney damage in patients.
