--- page 1 ---
Following lectures on glomerular disease, as an outline, we'll be talking about the
APD genealogy of glomerular disease, present a clinical case to classical glomerular disease,
look at the classification in thephrotic syndrome and the lymphatic syndrome, as well
as the clinical manifestations of glomerular disease, summarize and present a few more
cases at the end.
So, in terms of the APD genealogy is that glomerular disease is responsible for between
five to ten percent of cases of diseases in Africa.
It's often poorly diagnosed, poorly managed.
It can be successfully managed if it's diagnosed early appropriately.
So, in the case scenario, we have a 16-year-old patient who presents with passing very dark
urine, who generalized swelling, has acute kidney injury and a blood pressure of 180
over 120 and hematuria, and this will occur three weeks after severe infection or ear
injury, and the whole purpose of the lecture is to try to develop an approach to this type
of case.
In terms of the classification of glomerular disease, there's primary renal disease, which
is limited to the kidney, and it can get secondary kidney disease, where you have a systemic
disease, which involves the kidney.
So, there's two types of syndromes, but these are the clusters of features in the phrotic
syndrome and the lymphatic syndrome.
Each of them may be primary or secondary.
Looking at the primary causes, there's minimal change, focus, segmental glomerular sclerosis,
membranous, and sometimes in PGN, primary side, commonest cause of secondary lymphatic
syndrome is diabetes.
--- page 2 ---
And again, the lymphatic syndrome may be primary or secondary as well.
Common type is opposed to infectious for the primary or the chrycentric.
Secondary may be lupus or some sort of vasculitis.
So, in terms of the differences in the lymphatic syndrome, generally is very insidious.
It starts over a long period, as opposed to the phrotic syndrome, which commonly is
adapted with formininity data, is progression.
Early on in the lymphatic syndrome, there's normal kidney function, but there's impaired
kidney function, which happens early in the phrotic syndrome, and there's mainly protein
uria of both the 3.5 grams per day, some hematuria and the phrotic syndrome, but there's mainly
hematuria, but generally, subnaphrotic proteinuria, in most cases, of the phrotic syndrome.
There's hypoabubinemia because of the loss of protein, you have oliguria and salt and
water retention in the lymphatic syndrome.
There's hypo-lipidemia, hypertension occurs much later, as opposed to hypertension occurring
very early in the lymphatic syndrome.
So, once again, there's primary and the secondary causes of lymphatic syndrome.
Here's the important causes that you should know.
So, in terms of lymphatic syndrome, it's defined as a urine protein excretion of more
than 3,500 milligrams per 24 hours of proteinuria, but 1.73 meters squared.
It's associated with hypoabubinemia.
Consequently, there's a DIMA, which is peripheral or caddy-orbital.
Occasionally, it has a CITES or rule of fusions.
There's hypo-lipidemia, lipiduria, patients are prone to infection and hyper-quagulation.
In terms of what it looks like, basically, you have your filtration barrier and you have
--- page 3 ---
damage to your parasites, which are your supporting cells in the glomerulus, damage to the basement
membranes.
The photosites, the food processes, become effaced and detached.
As a consequence of that, there's a protein leaks from the glomerulus into the tubules.
That itself becomes toxic to the kidney.
We will go into the symptoms and signs in the following natures.
But what happens is that because of the protein in the urine, it becomes foamy and the loss
of protein eventually results in a deeper, various manifestations.
So, in terms of the site of the injury, most of them, in terms of lymphatic syndrome,
i.e. epithelial cells, in terms of theological tests, the none that we can do, the three
main types are in minimal change, focal extent, may be a signal from mening sclerosis and
your membranous.
So, this represents a picture of what it would look like when you have lymphatic syndrome.
We have damage to your parasites.
The food processes become damaged and effaced.
So, the difference of diagnosis, again, you have to consider the primary or secondary
causes, secondary to a systemic disease, and the secondary causes include diabetes, infection,
especially HIV, sometimes autoimmune disease, such as mucus, and the secondary causes are
much more common than the primary lymphatic syndrome, and diabetic kidney disease is the
most common cause of lymphatic syndrome.
The primary causes, you have a minimal change disease, more common in the younger patients,
and memory loss of property occurs mainly in middle-aged adults, and the FSGS occurs in
younger, the younger generation of people, starting around between 16 to 20 years.
--- page 4 ---
And some of the disorders, I might add, as I just remember,
refractive disorders can present either as a nephrotic or a grammatical refritus or a nephritic
syndrome. The key to understanding how to diagnose a product, the cardiac syndrome,
is to do a urine dipstick. If you do not do a urine dipstick, you will miss the diagnosis
completely, and this is part of your clinical examination, so it's imperative that you do a urine
dipstick. And what we look for is the presence of protein in the urine, as marked over here.
So we look for the presence of three pluses of protein, which signifies that there is a possible
nephrotic syndrome. So the protein investigations for nephrotic syndrome are the urine electrolytes,
looking at the kidney function, your EGFR, look at the liver function test, looking at your albumin,
a bone profile consisting of the calcium phosphate and magnesium, fasting lipid profile because of
the hypercholesterolemia. The urine microscopy looks at the presence of casts or lipid bodies.
You quantify a protein urea by an albumin-cracking ratio or a protein-cracking ratio,
or less commonly disease is 24-hour protein excretion. You obliged to ultrasound the kidneys
and to send the patient for a biopsy if the diagnosis is unknown.
What is the gentle management? It is basically salt through a restriction.
You treat the edema, you restrict the salt to less than 5 grams per day per patient.
The adioretics commonly look at the adioretics, such as fluomide.
You can add a thiazidiotic to promote further diuresis and you aim for a loss of weight of about
0.5 to 1 kilo per day and you have to chart the patient's total intake and chart the total output.
The management is to reduce the protein urea, which causes further inflammation and fibrosis
of the kidney. So you use antifrotic urea drugs such as your ACE inhibitors, ARVs or calcium
channel blockers, complete the hypertension and aim for a blood pressure of about 120 over 75
and you protein restrict the patient to about 0.8 milligrams per kg per day of protein.
--- page 5 ---
In terms of the hyper-cargulability, it occurs because of increased liver pro-cargulant synthesis
and increased loss of anti-cargulants. Commonly patients with lymphatic syndrome
have deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism and they have a high protein urea,
so you need to require anti-cargulation and you need to put them either a logarithmic
numerically weight heparin, warfarin and keep your INR between 2.2 and 3, especially if they
vary protein urea. In terms of infection, they have a loss of IgG in the urine,
one has to be vigilant for pneumonias and urinary tract infections and one has to vaccinate them
for pneumococcal disease. In terms of dyslipidemia, this occurs because of the increased liver
synthesis and reduced catabolism of alveial cholesterol. You require dietary adjustment
to the patient and we put them on HFG-CoA reductase inhibitors, commonly known as statins.
So, in terms of your management, your kidney biopsy allows you to get a definitive diagnosis
and if you have a primary neurotic syndrome, patients go on immunosuppression and it's
according to the histological diagnosis that we find. The common agents are used are prednisone,
sacrosporin, tachrolimus, bicofenolate, mofito, azathiprin and cycloposphamide.
Again, looking at grammatical arthritis as a whole, non proliferative types that we mentioned
now is your nephrotic syndrome mainly, the minimal change of membranous and your vocal
segmental granosterosis. We're not going to go on to the more proliferative types. We are nephritic
syndrome and the nephritic syndrome can have a spectrum of the way of presenting and either
have asymptomatic grammatical immaturia, it can have just purely blood in the urine,
some protein or it can have a frank nephritic syndrome, have acute kidney injury,
variable protein urea, the presence of blood in the urine, edema and hypertension or they
represent a farminate renal failure or rapidly progressive grammatical arthritis which if untreated
would lead to end stage kidney disease. So, the acute differentic syndrome commonly known as
--- page 6 ---
grammatical arthritis is caused by a grammatical inflammation, present spend therefore with
impaired kidney function, presence of blood in the urine or hematuria and or variable amounts of
protein urea. There's polyguria with signs of soft and water retention, there's acute hypertension
and involvement of other almonds such as your palmini, you can hear palmini hemorrhages,
skin involvement with papibil popular or you can get arthritis as well. Again, you can have the
position of immune complexes with antibodies which triggers inflammation within the grammatical
inflammation which injury of the grammatical membrane and you can get leakage of some protein
urea that may need blood into the urine and the typical feature is the presence of dysmorphic
red blood cells and red blood cell cast in the urine and it reduced GFR. All of them need to
watch and solve retention, reduce volume of urine, eventually renal failure, edema and hypertension
if untreated. So, you can see that there's a variable amount of different sites of injury for
the lymphatic syndrome, it could either be the endothelial cell, the mesangial cell or it could
be a combination of them and you have serological tests that you can do for different types of
the primitive GN such as complement and ASOT for your postine fractures and you can have again
complement and anti-DNA antibodies for lupus which is your rapidly progressive type and you can
have anchor antibodies for your vasculitis. So, in investigations that we do are urine
lipsticks for immaturia and protein urea, do urine microscopy for red cell, looking at the
red cell morphology, typically we look for red blood cell tasks or dysmorphic red blood cells,
we look for protein urea, again with the albumin clapping ratio or protein clapping ratio,
generally less than one gram per day, we do a kidney function test looking at your EEGFR,
your bone profile, liver function and a full lymphatic screen. So, some of these serological
tests have been sent patients for our HIV hepatitis B and C, which are implicated sometimes in
your lymphatic syndrome, you can send it to a syphilis test, look for ANA screen for lupus
--- page 7 ---
and anchor screen for vasculitis and an ASOT for postheptococcal or postine fractures GN
and complement is generally known for lupus or postine fractures GN. Again, the urine
lipsticks is vital for the diagnosis and we look for the presence of blood, which is present on
the first year, presence of one or two pluses or three pluses of blood,
signify there's an active sediment and the presence of urine may also,
a protein in the urine may also occur suggesting an ephritic syndrome. This is a typical appearance
of red blood cell cast, you have all the cast that are present that comes from the tubules,
they accumulate because of blood loss in front of the grammarianous into the tubules.
Then you get a dysmorphic red blood cell because the red blood cells are not supposed to come
through the grammarianous or the filtration barrier. As they squeeze through the grammarian
abracement membranes, they become abnormally shaped and they're called dysmorphic.
During an ultrasound, you look for the echogenicity of your kidneys, they become hyperachobic,
they have the same echogenicity as the liver.
The definitive diagnosis of an ephritic syndrome is generally done with the kidney biopsy
and you would know exactly what the diagnosis is and how to treat them.
So in terms of management, if you salt and water restriction, you correct the volume
status of the patient, limit salt again and you reduce the already take to at least half a liter
to one liter per day and you adjust according to the urine output. So you generally give them
whatever they passed as urine for the previous day plus 500 mils. Patients are put into diuretics,
you monitor the daily weights and you treat them for infections and make sure that nutrition is
adequately maintained. It's important to control the blood pressure. It's often increased because
of volume overloading. The target for the blood pressure is 130 over 80, either using an ACE or
an ARB which has antifatologic and anti-protenetic effects. You can monitor the potassium levels,
--- page 8 ---
put them on diuretics. You can add beta blockers and calcium channel blockers to control the blood
pressure. So dialysis is indicated if there's any indication for them, if there's encephalopathy,
there's severe fluid overload, persistent hyperkalemia or a unine pericarditis. In terms of
immunosuppression, it is tailored to whatever you find on a kidney biopsy and we use prednisone,
sacrosporin, technolumus, azothioprene and microfenidin. These are just a few of the immunosuppressants
that we use to treat acute diffridic syndrome. So what are the clinical manifestations again,
just to illustrate the primary disease may be limited to the kidney or maybe associated systemic
conditions, offered associated with infections, autoimmune disorders, malignancies and drug reactions.
If you suspect it, you have to take a proper history to the examination and the proper blood
or laboratory studies. Patients with systemic science, they only have fever, chills, loss of weight,
night sweats and fatigue. They have eye involvement sometimes in the retinitis or the ureitis
and they have epistaxes, sinusitis and oral ulcers. The cardiovascular one has to look for
murmurs or pedicarditis, chest pain or heart failure. Quite often they have apoptosis,
infiltrates or nodules or pulmonary edema. They can have colitis or pancreatitis,
which is a systemic manifestation. They can have seizures or peripheral neuropathy.
They can have digital ischine or infarction and they can have skin rations perpular.
They can also have arthritis, apryalgias and myalgias as part of the systemic infection.
They're properly prone to infections with staphylococcus or streptococcus infections as well.
So how would you, what's your differential diagnosis? Basically you look at the type of syndrome
that you're looking at. Is it a nephrotic syndrome or is it a nephritic syndrome? Is there blood?
Is there protein or is there blood and protein in the kidney and how in the urine and how much
of protein or blood is the quantifying them? Does the patient have systemic features of illness
and what is the kidney dysfunction? I mean what is the EGFR and what is the level of protein
--- page 9 ---
urine that the patient is passing and you try to determine the cranial disease if it's nephrotic
or if it's nephrotic? This is another algorithm. Basically you get some of the words to be in
a protein urea and you have to ask is there a nephrotic syndrome present or is it a nephrotic
sediment present? Is there blood in the urine and is there any evidence or if it is a multi-system
disease? If the answer is yes, you have to look at a second G ephrotic syndrome. The answer is no,
you have to consider a primary nephrotic syndrome. Similarly there's no evidence of
a nephrotic urinary segment. There's no blood but many protein and is there a multi-system
disease present? Quite often it is diabetes mellitus which is the cause of the second
in ephrotic syndrome or it may be a primary cause as we mentioned before, your membranous
your minimal change or FSGS. So in summary, pulmonary disease is a group of disorders that
affects the pulmonary large, affects the fulsing incense of the kidney and can present with a
variety of symptoms including blood in the urine, excess protein in the urine, edema
and hypertension. It's classified into two major categories either primary or second
agglomerative disease and primary agglomerative disease affects mainly the glomeruli but second
agglomerative disease is a disorder that affects the kidneys but the glomeruli damage as a result
of an underlying systemic disorder. Important investigations or the approach is to get a
history and examination to do urine dipsticks, to look at the urine microscopy, to assess the
kidney function, to quantify protein urea, to do the relevant blood investigations, to image the
kidneys, the definitive diagnosis is made of the kidney biopsy and is to manage properly
according to the histological diagnosis. So let's look at some of the cases. You have a
78 year old type 2 diabetic for the past 20 years present with 4 grams of protein urea
hypertension in the demonstrated. So this is the fact that they got no blood in the urine,
kidney function may appear slightly abnormal or normal but it looks predominantly like a
--- page 10 ---
secondary nephrotic syndrome, diabetes looks to be the cause. Second location is a 22 year old
black male who presents with a theme art history of fatigue, limbs swelling and T plus is a protein
urea and dipsticks, normal black pressure. Again it looks predominantly like a nephrotic syndrome,
it might be a primary either an FSGS it may be a secondary could be unlikely to be diabetes
but you have to consider other causes of security such as HIV. So 24 year 20 low patient presents
with generalized skin rashes arthritis, 2 pluses of blood and a trace of protein on dipsticks again
get a combination of blood and protein, young female systemic features to think about a secondary
cause of a possible nephrotic syndrome and lupus will be on potential causes here.
So 32 low patient, a diabetic presents with 2 years, 3 pluses of protein but 2 pluses of blood
and dipsticks, blood pressure is raised and red blood cell casts are present. So this is although
this is a diabetic patient who's got 3 pluses of protein, important features are the presence of
hematuria having hyper, hypertension and presence of red blood cell casts suggest that there is a
primary nephrotis and acute nephrotic syndrome going on here. So a 30 year old presents with
persistent microscopic hematuria on initial insurance screening, normal kidney function and
black pressure. Honest to consider, the microscopic hematuria may be due to a primary nephrotic syndrome.
