--- page 1 ---
With the lecture on HIV and the kidney, I'm Dr. Harid was out in the department of technology.
So as an outline, we look at the clinical scenario, look at the epidemiology of HIV associated
kidney disease in South Africa, look at the causes of kidney dysfunction.
HIV, you look at acute kidney injuries, thrombotic microangiopathies, drugs and the kidneys,
looking at acute interstitial nephritis, electrolyte disorders that can occur with HIV, as a base
disorder, chronic kidney disease, and we'll talk management in a few slides as well.
So looking at the clinical scenario, we have a 28-year-old patient who presents with chronic
diarrhea in three months. In examination, they have oral candidiasis, but caposi, sarcoma,
and dehydrated, they've got two pluses of protein on urinary good sticks. There are
ultrasound of the kidneys, which shows normal-sized kidneys, increased ecogenicity, CD4 count is low
and the viral load is unsuppressed. So the end of the lecture should develop an approach to this patient.
So what is the epidemiology of HIV and kidneys? Basically, the national estimate prevalence of HIV
in South Africa is about 14%. That means there's about 7.92 million people living with HIV in the
country, and kidney disease occurs in up to 5 to 10% of these people, and HIV associated
with properties and aggressive disease that will result in end-stage kidney disease if no treatment
is initiated. So I think the message clearly is that you need to start ARV therapy as quick as
possible, anybody who has potential HIV and kidney disease. So looking at the causes of kidney
dysfunction in HIV, they have these numerous causes, may be related to viral infections
in terms of, it may be, the high VIC or your high VAN, thrombotic micronomyopathy,
--- page 2 ---
high VIC and high VAN tend to be more chronic, but the thrombotic tend to be much more acute
process, may be related to kidney-induced or drug-induced kidney dysfunction in terms of your heart
therapy or supportive drugs that are used, may be related to HIV itself in terms of chronic GE,
in terms of malignancies, infections or cardiac failure that may occur,
or it may be related to systemic diseases unrelated to HIV infections. Quite often now,
patients with HIV may have diabetes, can have hepatitis B and C co-infections,
may have lupus, may have hypertension, and chronic pulmonary nephritis.
There's different types of HIV-associated diseases. Three most important are your HIV
associated nephropathy, as a prevalence of about 40 to 80%, can have HIV-associated immune
complex disease, or you can have your HIV-associated thrombotic micronomyopathy. These are your
glomerular nephropathy. So the HIV-associated kidney disease can have variable manifestations,
present either acutely or chronically, can have committed disorders, maybe tubular disorders,
electrolyte disorders, acid-based disorders, or microvascular disorders.
You can get acute kidney dysfunction. The HIV-associated thrombotic micronomyopathy
presents acutely, you can have medication, nephrotoxicity, it's as a crystal urea with
obstruction of urine, you can have interstitial nephritis present acutely, or it may be
indirectly related to HIV infection itself, it may be opportunistic infections, or HIV-associated
diseases. Other causes are your acute kidney injury due to either pre-intrinsic postine or
causes, you can have disorders of osmolality, you can have potassium disorders, acid-based
--- page 3 ---
disorders. This isn't basically an approach to acute kidney dysfunction. In terms of your
kidney dysfunction, looking at the thrombotic micronomyopathy, the drugs,
decision of arthritis, and other causes. The acute kidney injury may be prenatal.
Quite often, patients may have volume depletion, can have dehydration, they can have a relatively
hypovolemia, they may have associated heart failure or cirrhosis, could be intrinsic
disorders, could be acute kidney necrosis due to long-standing ischemia or toxins,
or sepsis and sometimes drugs, or it could be interstitial nephritis as your intrinsic cause,
or it may be post-phenol in terms of your internal causes, could be crystal urea or
tumor lysis syndrome, it could be external in terms of obstructive causes such as
tumor or venive prosthetic appetite. This is basically an outline of acute kidney injury
and HIV. So, what are the risk factors for acute kidney injury, maybe HIV related,
being on heart or starting heart can cause acute kidney injury, having its defining illnesses
makes you more prone to AKI, having a low CD4 content, a high viral node, as well as being
hepatitis B, or a plantase C-co infection can cause, it's a risk factor for AKI.
HIV independent is having an older age, being diabetic, a preexisting chronic kidney disease,
or any acute or chronic liver disease, these are your risk factors for developing AKI.
So, you can have your thrombotic microbiome properties, this is associated with HIV, but the
association is not totally proved, presumed pathogenesis is that the virus can cause
damage to your endothelial or your lining cells of your blood vessels, activates the platelets,
--- page 4 ---
deposits within the microvascular of the kidney, commonin Caucasians, and it can cause acute
renal failure, plus proteinuria, hematuria, presence of a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia,
and a thromb surgery period, a verburum, and this can cause a TTP or a HUS type of picture,
which generally has a poor prognosis unless it is treated early and aggressively.
Then you can have drugs causing acute dysfunction, the drugs commonly are your own. It's used in
the management of HIV itself, to offer where it's probably the most common,
and that maybe drugs are used in the HIV-associated diseases, such as your antifungal,
amphotericin, B, your antiviral, the cyclover, or your antibiotics, like gentle bison.
They can cause a variety of conditions such as acute tubular necrosis,
acute interstitial refractors, crystal necropathies, acid-based disturbances, or even
electrolyte disturbances, eventually it will lead to chronic kidney disease.
So anti-viral drugs that are used are your nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors,
the diagonal scene, the associated with the host of kidney disorders can cause acute kidney
failure, vancomy syndrome, nephrogenic diabetes, etcetera, even anactic acidosis.
The mevidine is associated with renal treatment disorders and hypophosphatemia.
Your nucleotides to serve reverse transcriptase inhibitors can cause
your stay-off of work can cause acute kidney failure, vancomy syndrome,
damage to kidney tubules, nephrogenic diabetes, etcetera as well,
and your non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, such as nephrenipine,
--- page 5 ---
as known before the kidney effects and the evidence can cause kidney stones.
So it's important to know your anti-viral agents and the acute kidney injuries that they can cause.
Your proteins and inhibitors can be associated with your intertubular crystallization,
kidney stones, acute incisional nephritis, and papillary necrosis. Things like
returnover associated with the acute tuberculosis, the fusion energy inhibitors
can cause a manipulative gene, and what is required when you have a GFR that's low,
the dosage of your anti-viral device becomes adjusted as well.
So the tin-off of our associated renal dysfunction occurs and it's a rapidly
kind of kidney function. The moment it's instituted, cause of vancomy syndrome
characterized by proximal renal tubular acidosis.
A lot of proximal tubular function manifested by a failure to re-absorb glucose, bicarbonate,
and phosphates, excuse me, and because a hypochalemic metabolic acidosis is hypophosphatemia and
like glucose urea. This is the characteristic feature of tin-off of our associated kidney dysfunction.
And the mechanism of injury is that it causes proximal tubular damage and it's due to
mitochondrial toxicity of your proximal tubular cells. And once patients develop acute kidney
injury, drugs should be discontinued regardless of the underlying geometry.
Other drugs that can cause acute tubular injury are your acyclo work and cause crystallization
of your tubules, amphotericin B is associated with acute tubular necrosis, renal tubular acidosis,
and diabetes inhibitors, and ductrum can cause an interstitial nephritis and hypochalemia as well.
--- page 6 ---
Looking at your acute interstitial nephritis, these can develop one to two weeks after the
introduction of a new drug. Commonly, in HIV, you can use drugs as a deniver or antibacterial,
such as rubita, lactam, sulfanomides, use of non-steroidals, proton pump inhibitors,
allopurin, or any over-the-contour medications. All of these can cause an interstitial,
acute interstitial nephritis, and damage the kidneys.
And the characteristic features, if you do a urine lipstick, they have pyudia, they have a peripheral
use of nephilia. Patients represent the flank pain, fever, and rash. Early diagnosis is crucial
to avoid permanent damage, and it is basically on the clinical grounds, and if the diagnosis is
not apparent, patients can have kidney biopsy. So the management of acute interstitial nephritis
is to immediately withdraw the offending drug and to treat the patients with glucocorticoids
for at least seven to ten days. In terms of other causes, you can have your autistic infections.
Any cause such as they can occur with advanced HIV are you disseminated TB,
and renal tuberculosis or violent refractors can cause damage to your kidneys. Any systemic
sepsis or malaria can cause associated damage. The presence of chronic gastroenteritis,
heart failure, or immunological diagnosis, also contribute to acute kidney injury.
Your electrolyte disorders that occur in HIV are hyponitemia, often due to your gastroenteritis
syndrome of inappropriate ADH, even adrenal insufficiencies, can have a variety of potassium
disorders. You can cause hypokalemia, hypokalemia, adrenal interefficiency, or hypodynamic
high-polar gastroenterism. All these are your electrolyte disorders that occur in HIV.
--- page 7 ---
Acid-based disorders, it's commonly a non-and uncapped metabolic acidosis. This causes
due to acute gastroenteritis. You can have a respiratory alkalosis or a respiratory acidosis
due to lung infections. You can have a tubular acidosis due to a variety of adrenal disorders,
and you can have a high-and uncapped metabolic acidosis, which is common with chronic kidney disease,
and in-stage kidney disease, or it may be due to lactic acidosis, either type 1 or type A or type
B. This is your acid-based disorders that occur in HIV. In terms of the chronic kidney disease due
to HIV, you can have hyphen, hypic, look at the management. In terms of chronic kidney disease,
these are directly associated with HIV infection. You can get clomerular disease such as your
HIV-associated nephropathy, or an HIV-related immune complex disorder, or a thrombotic
microanthropic jeopardy. All of these are related to a direct interaction between your HIV or the
immune complex that occurs, and that they're positioned into the kidneys. The comedy calls
a rapidly progressive kidney dysfunction and proteinuria, and if it's a repeated and prolonged
associated aka insults, you can have worsening of your HIV-associated conditions. It's quite
often we can have comorbid conditions affecting the patients. The patients now can have diabetes
and hypertension and lupus associated with your HIV conditions, and these are general risk factors
with the immune population as well. So what is HIV-associated nephropathy? It's a high-grade
proteinuria, can exceed 10 grams per day, and it occurs in about 30% of patients, up to 80% of
HIV. It's associated with a rapid progression of kidney dysfunction, especially in patients
who have African descent, who have APOL-1 gene, and often associated with detectable viral load,
--- page 8 ---
which is unsuppressed, they tend to have large, ecogenic kidneys on ultrasound. These are the
characteristic features of an HIV-associated nephropathy. What is the pathophysiology? It's
an HIV-infects, the parasites in the kidneys, causes a loss of differentiation markers,
loss of food processes, causes immature forms of collagen to be expressed, and it causes the
capillary loops to collapse, affects the tubules, causing a loss of differentiation,
causes apoptosis, proliferation of your kidneys, and leads to tubular degeneration.
So this is the pathophysiology of high band. What are the pathological features? You have
complete collapse of your domesticity. This is your capillary loops, and it's been completely
collapsed in HIV. There's prominent tubular dilatation, as well as interstitial inflammation.
Clinical features, they can be totally nonspecific. You can have fatigue, you can have
malaise, anorexia, proritis. Most patients have advanced HIV infections. They tend to have
high viral loads and a low CD for count, and they may present either as an acute or chronic kidney
failure. The uncommon features are peripheral edema and hypertension. Diagnosis is made by
renal biopsy if you're unsure, but generally, all the underlying factors that I mentioned
can contribute to the diagnosis. It can remain without kidney biopsy. The supporting evidence is
a good response to antiretroviral treatment. Calutistic features are your black patients,
present with late onset disease, present with more than one gram of protein unia per day,
the rising seed in creatinine, and you have enlarged echogenic kidneys and ultrasound.
And generally, they have no red blood cell cast on the urinary sediment.
--- page 9 ---
So the treatment, P, heart therapy, these patients, without heart therapy, progress rapidly to
end stage kidney disease. But by controlling the HIV infection with heart,
initially or immediately initiating the therapy leads to an improvement of kidney function
and a reduction in morbidity and mortality. And controlling the protein unia should be with an
ACE inhibitor or an ARB. So the message here is to start the heart therapy as quick as possible.
The patient who's got an uncontrolled CD4 or HIV viral load to prevent them from developing
in stage kidney disease. One of your probabilistic features, if you have the presence of hypertension,
a very low serum albumin, high protein excretion, high serum creatinine,
low CD4 count, detectable viral load, low hemoglobin. These are poor prognostic features
in HIV associated kidney disease. When you get your immune complex
arthritis, there's no strong ratio of predilection. There's different characteristics of these
disease poor categories. There's a variable presentation. They can have acute kidney failure.
You can have dys proteinuria and or hematuria. And the immune complexes with the HIV attitudes
have been identified in the circulation and in kidney tissues. So this is a different
form of chronic kidney disease due to HIV. So what is your kidney disease risk in HIV?
You look at basically at the race. Look at the family history of kidney disease.
You look at the CD4 count. You look at the viral load. Look at the nephrotoxic
medications the patient is using. The use of recreational drugs. Are they smoking?
Are they any comorbidities, are they diabetic, hypertensive, they've got hepatitis BOC
--- page 10 ---
co-infection? Or do they have atherosclerotic vascular disease? So you have to provide a risk
assessment of this patient. How do we manage? Heart is the essential therapy. Use a three drug
resume consisting of RTI plus a protease inhibitor. This has completely transformed the
outlook for patients with HIV associated with property and the diagnosis of highway can be
considered as a location to start heart therapy regardless of the CD4 count. And continuous therapy
is important to gain the maximal benefit. There is a high incidence of end stage kidney disease
patients with treatments interrupted or they have poor compliance with heart therapy.
So, heart therapy exams and the following effects introduces proteinuria with the full
or partial remission of lymphatic syndrome. There is delayed progression of kidney impairment
and the potential recovery and dialysis independence that the patients do not become dialysis
requiring. The use of ARB or ACE inhibitors as a protein, as for other protein unique
disease has shown to improve the prognosis and prednisone for short causes also has been shown
to improve the patients of higher end. Then you have the scenario and let's go back to the scenario
28 euro patients with the idea for three months evidence of AIDS, dehydration and proteinuria
