--- page 1 ---
And this is the lecture on hypertension and the kidney, and Dr. Harry to serve.
So as an overview for this lecture, we're looking at the epidemiology of hypertension.
We'll look at a clinical case as an introduction.
We'll look at what is hypertensive nephropathy and develop an approach to hypertension including
the history, the examination, and relevant investigations.
We'll do a classification of hypertension.
We'll look at how to measure blood pressure, looking at different causes, either primary
or secondary hypertension, as well as the management in terms of lifestyle measures
and drug treatment.
So there's more than one billion adults in the world who have hypertension.
At least 40% of people or adults over the age of 25 have hypertension.
It's silent, it's invisible, and progressive disease.
There's about 8.2 million adults in the public sector, the female predominance in South Africa
who have hypertension, and about more than one-third of patients are kidney replacement
therapy.
That means on dialysis in South Africa, hypertension as a primary cause.
So what is blood pressure, product of your cardiac output and your systemic vascular
resistance?
Anything that increases your cardiac output or a systemic vascular resistance will lead
to hypertension.
So your cardiac output can be increased by hypovolemia in terms of numerous kidney diseases.
As well as endocrine diseases, it could be due to stress, sympathetic activation, or
endocrine and uplasias.
Systemic vascular resistance increases due to sympathetic activation, atherosclerosis
--- page 2 ---
of blockages within your arteries, adrenal artery disease, as well as endocrine properties,
as well as cerebral ischemia.
So looking at a clinical case, we've got a 45-year-old male patient who presents with
headaches, blood vision, and malays for three weeks.
An examination is blood pressure.
It's raised at about 180 for 110 millimeters of mercury, it's got a slight tachycardia,
and it's got a retinopathy with a heaving apex speed.
It has an espergallop, and it's got two pluses of protein and no blood in the urine.
ECD shows marked left ventricular hypertrophy with strain.
Your purpose, learning, is to try and develop a clinical approach to a patient's such as
this.
So this is what hypertensive nephropathy looks like.
Basically, when you have a patient with a hypertension, they develop arterial sclerosis
of the renal vessels, they develop sclerosis of the glomeruli, as well as interstitial fibrosis.
This is interstitial fibrosis.
This is ongoing progressive disorder, which eventually will destroy the kidney, especially
the blood pressure is not controlled.
So in terms of history-taking, we've asked the patient about the previous or the first
documentation of hypertension, may not be confirmed, was it done on two separate occasions?
We look for evidence of end stage for organ damage, especially in the heart, the brain,
the kidneys, and the eyes.
We look at the assessment of the cardiovascular stages.
We look at the exclusion of secondary causes of hypertension.
Is there any cause of hypertension that can become apparent?
--- page 3 ---
But most often, patients are asymptomatic.
So in the history-taking, we look again on the, basically, we ask the patient that they
have previous angina or previous myocardial infarctions, they have had previous de-vascularizations,
or heart failure, in terms of the brain side effects.
We look at previous strokes or transient ischemic attacks, or is it sometimes of dementia?
Did they have a diagnosis of chronic kidney disease, or a diagnosis of peripheral arterial
disease or retinalopathy due to the hypertension?
So what are the symptoms quite often?
You can get hypertensive urgency symptoms, they can have a headache, we have lightheadedness,
they can have shortness of breath or nausea or heart palpitations, sometimes they can
have apistaxis or feel anxious.
But most important in any hypertensive is that they are asymptomatic.
The other symptoms that can occur are blood vision and reduced concentration.
So the examination, one looks for talk about the damage that they have in chest pain or
just discomfort, might have possible coronary artery disease as a consequence of uncontrolled
hypertension, they can have neurological symptoms, I can have the peaches of a stroke
transient with ischemic attack, they can have dysstate and easy fatigue possible in peaches
of heart failure and claudication, such as peripheral arterial disease.
What are your major cardiovascular risk factors, use of tobacco, even chewing tobacco, anybody
with an elevated LDL cholesterol or total cholesterol, patients with diabetes, patients
with obesity, especially the BMI is more than 30 and you can have age as you age, chances
of cardiovascular risk factors increases more than 55 for men and 65 for women.
If you have a GFR of less than 60 most per minute, it's the major cardiovascular risk
factor, presence of protein urea is a risk factor as well and a family history of premature
--- page 4 ---
cardiovascular disease as well as a lack of exercise.
So these are your major cardiovascular risk factors that you should ask your patient about.
In terms of the history you ask about over the counter medications, herbal medications,
you look at the history of using anti-appetence of medications, for females you ask about
oral contraceptives, the use of alcohol, any illicit drugs, non-steroidal drugs, as well
as corticosteritis or even licorice, these are the important causes that can cause hypertension.
You look at your complications, you look for evidence of cardiac hypertrophy, you look
for evidence of chronic kidney disease, previous strokes or peripheral artery disease or retinopathy.
These are the blood-based complications that occur, chronic longstanding hypertension.
Physical examination, you look funder, you look for evidence of lateral hemorrhages or
aneurysms or cotton wool spots.
Fonduscic eye examination basically looks at earlier late, chronic acute hypertensive
retinopathy.
If you get a arterial venous nicking, vessel wall changes, you can get copper, silver wire
appearances, lenses of heart exodates, may be flankship hemorrhages and papillatema as
a disease progresses.
You can get acute or chronic okay, the changes and maybe the initial finding anybody is asymptomatic.
So here's what I'm talking about, you can get your AV nicking that can occur initially,
you get your heart exodates and you can get papillatema, which is the late sign of hypertensive
retinopathy.
On examination, you look for absinthe weak pulses, especially the femurals, you suggest
that there's a cructation of your chest or peripheral vascular disease, you look for
bruise over the carotid arteries, distended veins or large thyroid glands, listen for
bruise over the renal artery, over the upper abdomen and the presence of bruise suggests
--- page 5 ---
renal artery stenosis.
On cardiac examination, you look for evidence of nephrotricular hypertrophy, quite commonly
the apex beat is displaced, it's a sustained and large apical implants and the presence
of an S4 gallop when you listen to it and allow S2 is present with the hectic root dilatation.
These are the clinical features that suggest this long-standing, established hypertension.
In terms of your nubonch investigations, you do hemoglobin, you look for target organ damage
in terms of anemia, you do urine dipsticks and urine analysis, either excluding primary
or secondary causes, developing cardiovascular risk profile and look for damage as well.
Cine potassium or hyperpillemia may be associated with endocrine causes, Cine clapping looking
for kidney disease, blood glucose excludes diabetes, lipid profile looking at the lipid
status and ECG.
So this is the basic investigations for hypertension.
In terms of your ECG, here's marked RVH, which is the feature of a hypertensive disease
and it says there may be underlying kidney disorders and cardiovascular risk factors.
In terms of a higher classification or classification of the hypertension, normal is generally
less than 120 and less of systolic and less than 80 diastolic pre-hypertensives are between
120 to 139 or 80 to 89 diastolic.
Stage one is if you have persistent blood pressure between 140 to 159 and your diastolic
is 90 to 99, stage two is more than 160 and the diastolic remains over 100.
So how do you measure the blood pressure correctly?
Patient has to have their back supported to be sitting down, no talking between risk periods
they should have a rest, arms should be bare and resting on the table and you should have
a valid basically device to manage the blood pressure and the feet should be flat on the
floor when you're measuring the blood pressure.
--- page 6 ---
If you do not do these, this posture or this basically getting the patient to relax, you
may have an incorrectly high blood pressure.
So patients should be in a quiet room with no talking, should not smoke at least to have
coffee 30 minutes before the measurement, blood pressure should be empty and the time
for the last blood pressure should be recorded, it should relax for 5 minutes and you should
do the blood pressure on both arms separated by at least 1 to 2 minutes and take an average
of the two readings on more than two occasions and you should provide the patient's blood
pressure to the patient to give them an insight to the information.
So how do you make a diagnosis of an hypertensive nephropathy and it is generally inferred from
the clinical characteristics of the patient and the exclusion of other causes of kidney
disease.
So patients generally with hypertensive nephropathy tend to have a long history of hypertension,
they tend to have a particular hypertrophy and ECG, they have a relatively normal urinary
sediment, kidneys start to shrink up, sides on ultrasound and they have slowly progressive
kidney function.
If you do measure it, it becomes gradually worse and the proteinuria that develops is
non-defrotic.
So these are the features of a hypertensive nephropathy.
So generally the hypertension precedes the development of proteinuria or kidney functioning
impairment and there is no other obvious cause of kidney disease, patients with a phrotic
syndrome in contrast have a monitor to heavy proteinuria and a demon while primarily the
disease tend to have signs and symptoms of the disease, hypertension, a mild to
mild proteinuria and often they have chemituries.
So one of the secondary causes that we should consider are the neurologic stenosis, the
--- page 7 ---
presence of obstructive sleep apnea, presence of glomerular arthritis or underlying chronic
kidney disease or inherited kidney disease such as polycystic kidney disease.
They have numerous endocrine causes which I'm sure will be discussed and you can have gestational
hypertension, syndrome, NADI-H, basically, S-I-A-D-H and any cardiovascular causes such
as co-optation of the uterus.
So these are your secondary causes of hypertension that can be looked for.
What are the treatment?
It's lifestyle prevention which is the first or the most important initially.
What lifestyle agents do is they decrease the blood pressure, reduce drug requirements
and include your cardiovascular risk profile and the effects are synergistic, synergistic,
with the use of anti-hypertensive agents to provide clear advice for the patient which
is culturally appropriate and try to use all your visual material to educate your patients.
And this information should be provided even to those with high normal, that is pre-hypertensive
patients and patients with positive family history.
So what lifestyle agents do we talk about?
You reduce the salt in the diet.
So reducing the salt reduces blood pressure in normal intensive as well as hyper-hypertensive
populations.
It enhances the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs when you reduce the salt and the normal salt
range is generally between 8 to 12 grams per day.
They should try to reduce as much as possible to at least 6 grams per day.
So at least in total, not more than one teaspoon of salt in total in the patient.
And the majority of salt is hidden in many foods such as your breads, your stock cubes
and your ready meals, including breakfast cereals and sauces.
--- page 8 ---
And to avoid ask the patient to avoid cooking, assault in cooking and to use natural ingredients
such as spices to improve the taste of the fish.
Patients need to be referred to a dietician to reduce the salt and they should be advised
to do that with time the salt sensitivity will improve and you will get used to a taste
of food with lower salt.
Patients should be advised to lose weight, especially in the BMI is more than 30, because
it fuels the incidence of blood pressure and type 2 diabetes, weight reduction reduces
the blood pressure and it has an beneficial influence on insulin resistance, the cholesterol
profile, left ventricular hipology and diabetic control.
Patients should be advised to eat and to eat a healthily in terms of the dash diet.
You should research that what is the dash diet to advise patients to follow the dash
diet.
Exercise is important, think of the word fit and exercise on its own can reduce the
blood pressure by up to 10 millimeters of mercury.
So patients should be advised to exercise 5 times a week with moderate intensity and
at least 30 minute intervals and it should be any aerobic exercise.
They should try to reduce the alcohol consumption and limit this to at least 2 drinks per day
they do drink.
They should try to reduce the caffeine exposure because more than 5 cups of coffee a day,
undesirable, increases your blood pressure by at least 10 to 15 millimeters of mercury
and they should learn how to monitor their stress or to reduce their stress in their
lives.
What type of medication to be used?
The goal of treatment is to prevent the long-term cardiovascular event or mobility and mortality
--- page 9 ---
that occurs with hypertension.
Practice most patients who require more than 2 drugs and you have to improve the compliance
by using at least one-state formulations and explaining the benefits and side effects
of treatment.
But there's an individual variation in drug responses to different patients.
So once the blood pressure is controlled the patient should be reviewed regularly for
monitoring and the major drug groups are generally well-tradulated and in general the lower the
blood pressure, the better it is for the patient and patients with a crewing benefit
and even the blood pressure doesn't change at least the blood pressure is heading towards
a normal.
So the type of choice is usual are your ACE inhibitors and you tend to accept the blockers
because they help with chronic kidney disease or available chronic kidney disease as well
and they help to reduce the progression of kidney disease.
So what we look for, the target that we aim for is a systonic blood pressure of more than
one or less than 120 millimeters of blood lead and by aiming for this target, it reduces
the progression in both diabetic and non-diabetic patients.
Different analysis have shown that the lower the blood pressure, better the prognosis overall.
But this has to be individualized.
You can't ask a systonic blood pressure or even a systonic blood pressure in a patient
is 85 years old.
It's not going to be possible, not any side effects of severe side effects of the patient.
So it has to be individualized depending on the comorbidities.
The different classes of drugs that we use are diuretics, ACE inhibitors, dendrites
and receptive blockers, calcium channel blockers, beta blockers, basal dilators, alpha agonists
--- page 10 ---
and your potassium.
I'm used potassium supplements for some agents such as your loop diuretics can cause hypokalemia.
So the medications that we generally use are aspirin and statin, basically to reduce
your cardiovascular risk profile and when do you refer for specialist care?
You refer them when there's an inpatient need, when they have accelerated hypertension,
but severe blood pressure with 3 or 4 retinopathy, blood pressure is more than one, 220, persistently
more than 220 over 120, you have evidence of incapunopathy or capsia or evidence of
aortic dissection.
They should be referred for specialist care.
If they have impending complications such as left ventricular failure, TIA, or possible
secondary hypertension, if they're resistant to more than 3 drugs, if they have multiple
drug intolerances, if they have multiple drug contraindications, or if they're persistent
non-adienants and non-compliance and if there's hypertension and pregnancy, these are the
indications to refer for specialist care.
So then we have our clinical case again, it's our 45-year-old patient with headaches, blood
vision and manays for 3 weeks, blood pressure is markedly raised at 120 or 180 over 110,
not a tachycardia and esyl gallop, and it's got evidence of marked alveation of strain.
So a clinical approach is based on the lecture that's been given, how would you approach
a patient and what would you do for this patient?
