--- page 1 ---
The lecture is on kidney replacement therapy.
So the question we have to ask ourselves in the country and as a province, is that can
we afford to treat our patients with diabetes, which kidney is the cost of teaching a patient
for currently about half a million per patient per year.
And we have approximately 5,000 to 10,000 patients in case it alone would require dialysis
every single year.
And this number could double potentially by the end of this decade.
So the obvious answer is no, we cannot afford to.
And the only thing that we can do is to try to prevent as many patients developing in
stage kidney disease.
Nationally, we've got a chronic renal dialysis program from the Department of Health that
regulates who can get into dialysis and those who cannot get.
And the differentiating feature between those can, except for dialysis, that they have to
--- page 2 ---
be transplantable within the state center.
The three types of kidney replacement therapies, there's hemodialysis, the use of a machine,
the spherotenial dialysis, the patient is responsible for their own dialysis using high concentration,
glucose bags and transplantation.
So the principle of dialysis in the machine basically is that you have your blood, which
is full of uremic toxins, it's high potassium phosphate, high water, there's a dialyzer
or a dialysis fluid that runs in the opposite direction in a counter-current fashion.
There's a membrane between the blood at the dialyzer in which your uremic toxins move
across in the opposite direction, the high concentration of potassium phosphate moves
across into the dialyzer and excessive water is also removed by the dialyzer.
That is the principle of dialysis.
The diffusion of electrolytes on water is proportional to the temperature of the solution
and is inversely proportional to the viscosity, the size of the molecule being dialyzed.
--- page 3 ---
And the membrane characteristics affect the rate of diffusion, these large pore membranes
have a faster rate of diffusion.
Any protein-brought solids that are found in the blood are not dialyzed, only the free
fraction is dialyzed.
So what are the indications to dialyze?
It's some of the acute kidney injury.
We have acute fluid overload, especially if they've got farminin, bermi edema, they've
got surfacty metabolic acidosis, generally with a bicarb of less than 10.
They've got surfacty hyperkalemia, it stays above 6.5, many more spelita.
If you've got uremic and kefelopathy, that you have seizures and confusion, pyroirimic
pericarditis, if you've got a pericardiofriction rub, or if you have to remove toxins, methanol
and ethylene glycol, can be removed by hemodialysis, so chronic kidney disease or indications
are the same as with acute, but especially if they've got long-standing malays, nausea
--- page 4 ---
and erectsia, they've lost weight, they're malnourished, they've control, poly control
back pressures, either the GFR is persistently less than 15.
So what's the principle again of hemodialysis?
We have basically the blood that leaves through an excess site, goes into a blood pump, is
pumped through a filter, and you get the dilusate flowing in one direction, the blood flowing
in the opposite direction, the counter-cardin flow, diffusion, you get the removal of
solutes, the removal of uremic toxins, removal of high concentrations of water, the blood
is basically filtered, cleared and returned to the body, each session lasts about 4 hours,
and this time we can do at least 5% of kidney function that we will normally expect kidney
function to do.
So GFR, at most of hemodialysis, is about 5 moles per minute, the type of excesses that
we use are your tend to do hemodialysis catheter, as well as a permanent hemodialysis or a tunnel
catheter, all are inserted into a large vein, we could use actually venous fistulas, post synthetic
--- page 5 ---
grafts as a point of access for hemodialysis.
The next common way of doing diluses to peritoneal dialysis is a high concentration of glucose
solutions that we use, insert a peritoneal dialysis catheter to the patient's abdomen,
and we infuse this fluid into the abdomen, what happens after 4 to 6 hours, the effluent
is released into another bag, through gravity, and the peritoneal fluid is drained from the
patient into the bag below, so the patient has to do approximately 4 exchanges a day,
and this is continuously, every day, for the whole week, to try and maintain their own dialysis.
And the principles underlying peritoneal dialysis are pretty much the same, there's diffusion
of high concentration of solutes, that's in the peritoneal membrane, to the lower concentrations
on the other side, based on the peritoneal catheter, there's osmosis, there's ultrafiltration,
all of which is at a much slower rate than what a hemodialysis catheter can achieve.
So the access for peritoneal dialysis is a temporary stink catheter for acute peritoneal
dialysis, or a permanent tank of peritoneal dialysis catheter for permanent CAPD, and
--- page 6 ---
this is how your coil sits within the peritoneal, and it allows the fluid to drain in, as well
as to drain out.
So what happens, what's the advantage of peritoneal dialysis is that your residual kidney function
is preserved for longer than hemodialysis, the ability to pass urine is maintained, it
is more readily available than hemodialysis, and it's not limited by the number of machines
that you have.
Patients generally spend less time in hospital, they become more empowered, more aware of
their treatment, but more training is required upfront for peritoneal dialysis.
So the most effective form of kidney replacement therapy is kidney transplantation.
First transplant was done in 1954 by Joseph Murray and colleagues, they won a Nobel Prize
for it in 1990, and generally the five-year survival rate in a country like UK is about
87%, and the options, therefore, are to get kidney from a live-related donor, someone
like a primary relative, with live, under-related donor, someone like a friend or a cadaveric
--- page 7 ---
donor, so someone who was declared brain dead and whose organs can be harvested for transplantation.
One of the benefits of kidney transplantation, first of all, the patient's survival improves
far more than the patients on dialysis, it allows you to predict the metabolic consequences
of CKD, that is your uremia, vitamin D, and immunometabolism, and uremia, it improves the
quality of life by more, by lots more than having the patient being on hemodialysis or
peritoneal dialysis, and by doing that, it improves the quality of life for the immediate
family, and it is far cheaper than dialysis, especially after the first year of transplantation.
But transplantation requires an extensive assessment to look at the clinical suitability,
that is the key factor for acceptance in the chronic state program, you have to do cross-matching
with the donor and the recipient, you have to look at the viral status of patients, you
have an immunosuppression post-transplant, which can cause problems, and you have to monitor
four and the cheap many infections of linked disease that can occur post-transplantation.
So kidney transplant is done, you harvest the kidney, it is placed in extra peritoneal
--- page 8 ---
position, the blood vessels and the unites are attached to the native kidneys, and allow
to drain into the bladder.
In terms of our South African logistic report of 2017, there's approximately 278 centers
for dialysis and transplantation in this country, only 30 belong to the public sector, we have
just over 10,000 patients on kidney replacement therapy, which is in a very low per million
population ratio of 190.
Some countries with a far less budgets than us are able to provide dialysis for far more
patients.
For the majority of patients are dialyzing or getting treatment in the private sector,
and the majority of patients, 71% of them are on hemodialysis.
There's a greater number of proportional transplanted pediatric patients in the public sector, and
in 2017, there were about 260 kidney transplants done in the country, the majority of them
were done in the private sector.
--- page 9 ---
So what is the most effective way of trying to prevent renal replacement therapy?
It's to obviously stop patients' developing in-stage kidney disease, a series of lectures
that we've given you is to try to achieve that.
So you have to manage your risk factors on the causes.
So in terms of dominant factors, you must know how to recognize it, the patient is diabetic,
you're very prone to developing kidney failure, your hypertensive, the same, you need to look
at other causes of kidney disease, such as infective or obstructive bureaucracies and to
treat them adequately, and to recognize any congenital diseases as well.
There's a recent concept, a new concept that's been introduced, it's a formal concept where
they look at support of care for in-stage kidney disease.
These are patients who are not being able to benefit from having any form of dialysis
or transplantation.
They have probably exclusion criteria from the National Department of Health criteria.
--- page 10 ---
These patients, we manage their blood pressures, treat their anemia, we look at the hypoeccemia
and we treat it as well, we give them symptom control, and we refer the patient and the
family to palliative care structures, and in many instances, what happens is that patients
sometimes will live longer than patients who are initiated on dialysis.
