--- page 1 ---
Good morning and I'd like to have it aside from the Department of Technology and this
is the technology introduction lecture. So the question is why do we study
technology? First of all the serious public health problem. About 10% of the
world's people who add up population have some form of kidney disease and about
10% of all hospital locations develop kidney injury. So it is a serious health
problem which is probably going to get worse in the next couple of decades. As an
outline of the talk, look at the anatomy and physiology kidney. Look at the
clinical syndromes that you will be developing approaches to. Look at
history taking, clinical examination and neurology topics that we will be
discussing. In terms of the anatomy, kidneys are 10 centimeters in size or 10
to 12 centimeters in size. The retroperitoneum problems that stand between
T12 and L3 are vertebrae and the right kidney is slightly lower than the left
because of the liver and the weight is approximately 150 to 180 grams depending
on the size of the patient. It's divided into a range of cortex, renal medulla,
--- page 2 ---
pelvis and a renal capsule. So here's your cortex, here's the medulla, here's
the renal pelvis and here's the capsule that sits around it as well. The main
function of the kidney will come to that now. The kidney supplied by arteries and
it is drained by veins, starts from the aorta, it tries to segmental, interlobular
arteries, eventually becomes the afferent arterioles with supplies that
remain alive. The venous change is from the efferent arterioles to the vasarecta,
very tubular capillaries, it merges basically from the little veins to the
inferior vinicava. The kidney is received about 20% cardiac output. So one group
of every heart pulsation or every injection fraction of the heart goes to
the kidneys. The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron and it's
composed of chibial and agglomerulus. The prospect 1 of a million nephrons per
kidney in a normal adult. The renal chibials can be divided into the
proximal-competated chibials, loop of handy, distal-competated chibials and
neglecting duct. Each segment has a distinctive criterion lining and function.
--- page 3 ---
It receives the outer protein from the renal co-pusil and it transports and
concentrates the outer protein as it comes out from the chibial. So this is
what the renal chibial is like. And the end of the renal chibial urine is formed,
the desorption, secretion and excretion of substances and electronics. In a
cross-section of the gremenitis, here's the arterial supply, the active
arterial arterial. Here's the venous drainage called efferent arterial. Here's
the glomerulus, the equinubaristability groups. Then you get the
duct of glomerular complex and made up of external zangial cells and they are
modified smooth muscle cells located in efferent arterial. So efferent arterial
surrounded by the duct of glomerular apparatus and macular denser is composed
of q-white cells in distal to complement the chibials. And what it does is monitors
the sodium chloride concentration within the lumen of the histocompetubules is
hyperosmolar, urine triggers the release of renin, vasoconstricts the efferent arterial,
which is this one, and increases your GFR and if this hyperosmolar urine triggers
--- page 4 ---
the release of adenosine causes vasoconstriction of the efferent arterial
to reduces the GFR. One of the functions of the kidney, it's an organ of
elimination of waste products, regulates your water and electrolytes,
regulates the acid base physiology in your body and it regulates the blood
pressure and blood volume. So if you look at the same function of good
acronyms in what they did, acid base balance, water balance, electrolyte balance,
chuck syndrome level, blood pressure control, makes fitting in such as a
ripto or mix almost such as riptopoietin and vitamin D as well. One of the
syndromes that you'll be dealing with, first of all, you can get based on an
atropical calcifications. If you get a clinical picture, where is the problem?
What syndrome predominates? So if you get problems with the chibial and
interstition, that is chibial interstitial disease, you can have vascular problems
which can be divided into small vessel disease, large vessel disease, diseases
of pregnancy, you can get clomerular problems. That means it can be
--- page 5 ---
hephritic syndrome and it could be hephrotic syndrome depending on the type of
picture that we have. And sometimes you get a combination of
tubular disease, vascular disease, and laminitis, the one or two or the other.
The clinical symptoms that you come across are asymptomatic urinary abnormalities,
sometimes we have isolated proteinuria or microscopic cupiduria, we can have
macroscopic imageuria, they can have hephrotic syndrome, hephrotic syndrome,
they have acute kidney injury, chronic kidney disease, and end-stage kidney disease.
These are the main clinical syndromes that you will be exposed to.
In terms of history, symptoms that may arise either from the kidney or the urinary tract,
may be due to impaired functioning of the kidneys in terms of salt and water handling,
may be a failing excretive function of the kidney and metabolic function of the kidney,
may be due to systemic causes and the majority are asymptomatic, especially in the earlier stages
of kidney disease. In terms of your past medical history, one has to look at urinary problems,
during childhood, if there were any previously documented kidney diseases or any kind in the
--- page 6 ---
patient, did they have insurance checks or employment checks that showed some issues,
did they have history of conditions like hypertension or diabetes,
how is the diagnosis made, how is it treated, how is the follow-up, what is the adherence,
do the patient or does the patient have systemic diseases, I think diabetes would be the most
important, then you can get connective tissue disease and cardiovascular disease.
You can have local symptoms of urinary tract disease, such as pain, either the
annoying, the ureteric area or super pubic area, the patient can complain that he's passing blood
in the urine, that's the ureteria, the urine may change in appearance, may change in volume,
they can have a lot of urine or polyurea or hardly any urine or allic urine or allic urine,
it can have no urinary tract symptoms, such as destructive symptoms,
it can have retention of urine, the force of the stream may be reduced,
it can have hesitancy or straining, it can have an intermittent flow of urine or the sensation
of complete inting, it can have storage abnormalities, that is manifest by ureteria,
daytime frequency, urgency or even urgent continents and dysuria, sometimes it can be
--- page 7 ---
complained of discharge as well. So in a system review, you have to look for clues to
underlying systemic conditions. The important ones are looking for skin rashes,
the patient have painful joints, do they have muscle legs, do they have reynolds
phenomenon, do they have dry, painful eyes, do they have a fever or night sweats, do they
suffer from sinusitis, rhinitis or epistaxis, do they have mouth ounces or photosensitivity,
if the patient complains of any of these, it suggests that there's a systemic cause
of the kidney disease. In terms of your drug and treatment history, you have to ask about
specific anti-apartensives, the past presently, was the patient a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs or any other over-the-counter medications, did they receive antibiotic
causes recently, are they on oral contraceptives, are they on steroids or immunosuppressive
agents, and do they use recreational drugs, and the nephrotoxic drugs that becoming
encountered are non-steroidal, some antibiotics, AR recombinations can be nephrotoxic and
chemotherapy agents as well. In terms of your sexual, menstrual, and obstetric history,
you ask about all the symptoms such as reduced libido, is the irregular menses, have they
--- page 8 ---
be previous pregnancies with complications, have these been stowbuds, you can change in the weight
and appetite for the patient, what are they that actually happens, are they vegan or they consume
a lot of alcohol, looking at the city which has a pre-deliction for kidney disease such as IgA
commonly found in the Caucasian and Japanese populations, diabetes and hypertension
commonly found in the black and Asian populations, and lupus as well, commonly found in the black
and Asian populations. If you have your social history, do they smoke, because it increases
your cardiovascular risk and kidney risk, the occupational history in terms of exposure to
malignancy-forming agents, and they have hepatitis, HIV risk factors, they have physical inactivity,
what are their social circumstances like, what are the basic amenities, are they living in
overcrowded conditions, what is their transport, do they live close to clinics, and what is their
income, and you look for a family history of primary relatives who have got hypertension
or diabetes. So an examination starts off with a general inspection for the
inflammatory system, looking at the mental state, do they have evidence of end stage kidney disease
in the form of hyperventilation or hiccups, do they have a cellular complexion, do they have
--- page 9 ---
a hydration over high data or dehydrated, do they have titties, nails, vascular shunts, do they have
a neuropathy, do they have bruising on the arms, do they have scratch marks on the arms, do they
have a malpathy in terms of their eyes, are they pale, do they have dryness or pita in the mouth,
do they have a rash that's apparent, and do they have a certain nose is autoimmune disease such as
vaginas, do they have pericarditis on the cardiovascular system or cardiac failure,
do they have pulmonary edema or any infection, is there scars on the abdomen, signifying dialysis
or previous operations, have they got a kidney transplantation or they have kidney masses,
is they think of capital insight in terms of the legs, they have edema, they have bruising or
pigmentation or scratch marks, in terms of the back is a tenderness or edema, and in terms of the
most important, probably one of the most important physical examination features is the
urine analysis, is the glucose adjusting diabetes or is there blood suggesting in the arthritis,
stone, where is the protein suggesting kidney damage, what is the urinary sediment, the other
things that you need to look at are your blood pressure, lying and standing and look at the
Bandai as well, so this is a general approach to any phology examination. In terms of the cardio
--- page 10 ---
respiratory examination, look at the respiratory pattern, blood pressure, chugging the venous
pressure, is the evidence of edema or the pulmonary or peripheral edema, what is the apex beat like,
what are the heart sounds, is there pericards or friction rub suggesting edemia, are the
cruel diffusions, is there pulmonary edema. Here's another slide looking at head to toe,
approached patients with kidney disease, started from the head looking for evidence of advanced
disease in terms of confusion and lethargy, do they have puffy face with puffy eyelids,
do they have bruising and bleeding as mentioned, do they have nausea and vomiting, do they have
urinary symptoms, do they have bone pain suggesting an osteodystrophy, do they have a polyneuropathy
and debuff their ankles, so this is a head to toe approach, again looking at the
nephrology system, so what nephrology topics will you be dealing with, looking at chronic kidney
disease, we get hypertensive nephopathy, diabetic kidney disease, HIV and kidney,
numerical disease, acute kidney injury, urinary tract infections, drugs and the kidney,
as well as kidney replacement therapies.
