--- page 1 ---
So, index case for urine tract infections is a 54-year-old diabetic patient, presents
with drivers, left side with black pain and dysphyria for three days, urine lipsticks
shows three pluses of lymphocytes, one plus of products.
At the end of this lecture, you should have a clinical approach.
As an introduction, UTIs amongst the most common bacterial infections in the world,
they informed millions of people worldwide.
They can occur at any part of the urine tract from the urethra to the kidneys, and UTIs
can cause a variety of symptoms, including dysphyria or painful urination, they can
cause urgency or frequency of urination, adhering bacteria, the presence of blood in the
urine, or they may be asymptomatic.
So, 50% of women in their lifetime will have a urine intact infection, and there's 10%
increase annual risk, enforcement of all the women, and a half a percent annual risk
is younger sexually active females, and 3 to 5% of females actually develop recurrent
--- page 2 ---
UTIs.
It's generally rare in men to be children, and if it does occur, it's associated with
an underlying urinary tract abnormality.
Looking at the nursing of the urine intact, the urinary tract consists of the kidneys,
the ureters, the bladder, and the urethra.
And the ureters carry the urine from the kidneys to the bladder, and the bladder stores the
urine and it is expelled, and the urethra carries the urine out of the body.
So, there's two main types of urine tract infections.
You have your lower UTIs and your upper UTIs.
The lower UTIs involve the urethra and the bladder, the upper UTIs involve the ureters
and the kidneys.
So, diagrammatically, this is an upper urine tract infection, it involves the kidney and
the ureter, but if it involves the bladder and the urethra, then it's a lower urine tract
--- page 3 ---
infection.
So, different definitions of UTIs, you can have an uncomplicated UTI, which is a symptomatic
cystitis, or a bladder infection in women, who has a normal urinary tract, could be a
complicated UTI in which it is a UTI in a structurally or functionally abnormal urinary
tract.
You can have a relapse UTI, we have a recurrent UTI, the same organism that has not been
adequately cleared with antibiotics, or you can have a reinfection that is a recurrent
UTI, the same or different organism after the initial clearance, or you can have recurrent
UTIs, which is more than three to four culture-proven UTIs in the year, it's more common in a female
patient.
So, the lower UTIs are more common in the upper UTIs, and they often caused by bacteria from
the rectum or the vagina, but into the urethra and travel up to the bladder.
Others offer lower UTIs, dysuria, urgency, frequency, hematuria, or the presence of
--- page 4 ---
foul-spanning urine.
The upper UTIs are less common, and cause more serious than the gender, more serious
than lower UTIs, and they can lead to kidney damage, impromptu treated or untreated.
The symptoms of upper UTIs are fever, chills, presence of flight pain, nausea, and vomiting.
One of the risk factors for UTIs, women are more likely to get infections than men, this
because the female urethra is shorter than the male urethra, and making it easier for
bacteria to enter into the bladder.
The other risk factors are patients with diabetes, sexually active, patients are sexually active.
The use certain types of birth control makes you more prone to UTIs.
Recent urinary tract surgery, or the presence of kidney stones, all of them cause structural
or functional abnormalities of the urinary tract.
One of the protective factors for UTIs, basically urine is produced, and the flow is unidirectional
in most people.
--- page 5 ---
There is lactoblastuli, that suppresses the general colonization, but it's protective.
You have CTTI, IgA, who reduces the attachment and invasion of bacteria, and is present in
the urinary tract.
The bladder has a low urine pH, the high concentration of urea, organic acids, and
basically what it does is protects from bacteria.
Then you have the upper urine tract, which has its local phagocytes, and there's a
renal production of antibodies and complement activation within the urine tract itself.
I would want to diagnose UTIs, diagnose the basis of symptoms and urine test, and the
test will check the presence of bacteria, the presence of white salka, or white sowat
salsa, white blood cells, or red blood cells, and the urine culture may be necessary to
identify the specific type of bacteria causing the infection.
So the diagnosis, one can do a urine dipstick, looking at the leukocyte yesterday's test,
which has a positive predictive value of 66%, and a predictive value of around 90%.
--- page 6 ---
You get the nitrate test, a couple nitrites, which is the highest specificity, and the
hematuria, which can occur in presence protein urea, such as it might be an underlying urine
tract infection.
One can send the urine off of microscopy, looking for white blood cell or red blood
cell cast, in the presence of bacteria, which can be cultured.
So one takes a urine in females.
If you've got a cystitis, generally you have about 1,000, more than 1,000 colony form
units per mole.
Part of the practice tends to be higher, about 10,000 colony form units per mole, and in
a female who's got asymptomatic bacteria, she can have at least 100,000 colony form units
per mole, but she's basically asymptomatic, that means she has colonized, the bacteria
have colonized her urine tract.
It's what investigations can do.
--- page 7 ---
One can do for urine tract infections.
One has to investigate, especially if you've got a part of the practice, which is not responding
to therapy, you do further imaging in the form of an ultrasound, intravenous pylogram,
IVP, or a CT scan.
If you've got suspect kidney stones or neurogenic bladder, one can do an ultrasound, a CT,
similarly an IVP or post voiding funds, and in men who have the first or second infection,
especially the elderly, wants to do a prostate-specific antigen, wants to do prostate examination,
and then look at an ultrasound or IVP with post voiding funds, so imaging is required
if there's a spig, there's an underlying structural defect.
UTIs are treated with antibiotics, generally, and the type of antibiotic and length of treatment
will depend on the type of UTI and severity of symptoms.
In some cases, UTIs will be treated with antifungals, depending on the culture, or antiviral medication.
Uncomplicated cystitis, to bloody infection, treated with general or prospective antibiotics,
--- page 8 ---
such as cyplofloxacin for three days, if it's complicated, one can treat them for seven
days, pregnancy, one user uses a co-amoxic lab for about seven days.
For acute pain in the practice, it's uncomplicated, you can use either cyplofloxacin and antibiotics
for 14 days.
One has to ensure that the patient has enough adequate or fluid, oral fluids, to ensure
that the bacteria get washed out, and if the patient has a complicated part of the
arthritis, that means there's an analyte structural defect, they've got evidence of
systemic sepsis, they have to be admitted, or if they're diabetic, because they're prone
to severe infections, one has to admit these type of patients.
So complicated part of the arthritis, you admit them, provide them an IV fluids, it requires
sometimes two, maybe three weeks of therapy, and the treatment depends on what you culture,
and the sensitivity of the urine, and their disfactors, and they do not respond, one can
subject them to an autosaur, even a CT scan.
--- page 9 ---
So one of the best ways of preventing UTIs is to drink plenty of fluids, so urinate frequently
is to practice good hygiene, to avoid the use of tissues or spermicides, and to try to drink
canverages.
It's not probably evidence-based, but this has some effect on preventing UTIs.
In terms of bacteriology of UTIs, E. coli is probably the commonest type of bacteria,
followed by staphs, aprophiticus, eclopsiella, internal cochia, and protease.
So in the X case, it's a 54-year-old diet, education, it presents with ribers, left-sided
flag pain, and dysudia for three days.
Urinate lipsticks shows three pluses of nucosacs and one plus of them.
In terms of clinical approach, it's obviously an older patient, which has predisposing factors
such as diabetes, the symptoms of the signs of one of RIGOs, and less than in flag pain
suggest that it's an upper during an attractive infection, the fact that the urine lipsticks
is positive, it is an infection, and it more than likely is a pylenophyte, pylenophyte
--- page 10 ---
is a diabetic patient who has systemic symptoms, quite an urgency, the patient probably needs
to be admitted, IV antibiotics, probably IV fluids, and pain control.
So UTIs are common and treatable conditions.
Early diagnosis and treatment is important to prevent complications, and the prevention
tips help the patients reduce the risk of developing UTIs.
