--- page 11 ---
o measure. And then you give eight milligrams
of dexamethasone at night and measure the serum cortisol the next day. And in essence,
you should get more than 68% suppression in the serum cortisol by the next morning.
And although there's no data for the standard high dose overnight, you can actually measure
the serum cortisol on the third day. And if there's not a 68% suppression of the serum cortisol,
it suggests a topic. And the thing is that you don't only get to do one test, so you have to do
all the tests and interpret them in combination. You can then do the ACTH, your cortisol response
to the CRF, ideally, or the DDAVP, where you measure ACTH and cortisol before and after the
administration of ideally CRF, or if you don't have, then DDAVP. And if it is pituitary, in other
words, it will respond technically normally. There will be a 50% increase in the ACTH,
after administration of CRF or DDAVP, and 20% increase in the cortisol, whereas if it is a topic,
you don't get it as high, and it remains high. But often you don't get any answer from that,
then you have to do inferior petrosal sinassembling. That's intervention, and I'll speak to it a little
bit. Other tests one can do is the DHEA. This is usually, and it's only harmful if you have
unilateral, in other words, low ACTH and high cortisol, and suggests that maybe there's a malignancy.
Materopone test is working on the physiology of cortisol production, and again, in the next topic,
you won't get any reduction, and the precursors or cortisol, whereas with the pituitary, you won't get.
The radiological tests to establish the course is to undertake MRI, the pituitary, CT,
of the adrenal glands, inferior petrosal sinus to distinguish between pituitary and ectopic,
and if you've established that this is a topic from your biochemical tests,
and the inferior petrosal sinussembling, then one is looking for all the other
sites at which you can get a topic, ACTH secreting tumors, and for that you do an
electrolyte scan, and a CT of the chest, the mediastinum, and the abdomen. So this is the inferior
petrosal sinussembling, where you enter the jugular vein through the jugular vein into the
inferior petrosal sinus, and the first thing you want to do is measure central that's over here
in the petrosal sinus and peripheral that's in the in the brachial, and the second is so you
want to see if there's a central to peripheral gradient, in other words, if there's a marked
--- page 12 ---
difference, then it would suggest that it's in the central, whereas if there's no difference,
it may be a topic. The next thing is once you've established that it's central, you want to determine
the side, so you can you lay it all both sides, and you measure the ACTH. So for example, you can
see in this patient, the ACTH is very high on the right side, and then it is on the left side,
suggesting that it's a right side of the chin. Now, how does on manage queshing syndrome? This
depends on the cause. It may be surgical or medical, and depends on that side. So if it's
pituitary, then obviously surgery, radiotherapy, or bromachriptin, or piceratide, if it's adrenal,
then it's surgery. If it's resectable, it's an adenoma, obviously. It's surgery, if it's a
carcinoma, it depends whether it's amenable to surgery, if not the radiotherapy, then
oncology drugs like mitutane, or OPDDD, or enzyme blockers like amino glutathamide. That's
if it's an adrenal cause. If it's pituitary, I've told you surgery, radiotherapy, or dopamine
agonist, but sometimes they don't respond, and then you have to do bilateral adrenal
ketamine, and the danger of that is inducing hypo adrenalism. If it's a topic, if it's isolated,
then you can subject that patient to surgery, and if you found it. If you are unable to isolate
it, or if the hypo cortisolism is aggressive, then you can undertake medical adrenalctomy,
which is ketoconazole, and the third option to use for cushioning synohortic cortisolism
is receptor blockers like myphopristone, which is not available here. Now, I've written the
Nelson syndrome. Now, what is Nelson syndrome? I've told you where you can't find the lesion,
and where the issue is really a problem, and you've undertaken bilateral adrenalctomy.
You've done all the investigations, and Nelson syndrome is where the problem was actually
originally in the pituitary, and because the biochemical and radiological features were
inconclusive, you underwent the patient was sent to bilateral adrenalctomy.
So if the problem was in the pituitary, and you did a bilateral adrenalctomy,
then obviously you'll get further enhancement of the stimulation of the pituitary
by the low cortisol. So you'll get further acetage increase, and then the tumor will start declaring
itself. And like I told you earlier, with every acetage molecule that's produced, a beta MSH
is also produced. So what happens here, Nelson syndrome is where the primary cause is in the
--- page 13 ---
pituitary, but the patient had bilateral adrenalctomy. And so you've got autonomous enlargement of
the pituitary associated with hyperpigmentation and compressive manifestations of an enlarging
tumor with visual symptoms and cranial nerve signs. And the treatment for Nelson's room is either
surgery or ideally surgery to remove the enlarged tumor, which hadn't declared itself in the first
instance, or giving dopamine agonists like bromocryptin, or analogs, or placeriotide,
or yeah, so basically there are other drugs, but I don't think those are important for you.
Oh, why all of these who have about crushing syndrome? Because it depends on the prognosis.
It's what happens, you know, if you treat the patient. So with respect to the prognosis,
the other thing I forgot to tell you is that if you, the problem is whether it's in the adrenal,
or whether it's in the pituitary, or whether it's an endoscopic problem, and you undertake
surgery, if it is successful, the serum cortisol will be normal, in fact will be low within 24 hours.
So that will give you an indicator of the success of your intervention.
And the prognosis is dependent. If it's untreated, it is fatal in five years,
where the patient will die from cardiovascular disease, the effects of diabetes and hypertension,
or infection. If it's a primary, in other words, an adrenal cause, if it's an adenoma,
there's a hundred percent cure rate. If it's a carcinoma, then obviously the prognosis is poor,
depending on whether it is an isolated one, or it is more involved. If it's pituitary, in other
words, secondary or quishing's disease, then there's a 95 percent cure rate.
So that's quishing's, and I'm now going to, I'm not going to stop share,
but I'm going to take a five minute break.
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
--- page 14 ---
you
you
you
you
to move now to primary hyper-eldosteroneism
or which is the involvement of the zona glomerulosa or its primary hyper-eldosteroneism is a condition,
which is due to autonomous hyper-secretion of the menarallocorticoid aldosterone
by the adrenal gland and is characterized by hypertension and renal wasting of potassium,
which results in hypokalemic alkalosis and muscle weakness.
It
in terms of etiology, the major causes of primary hyper-eldosteroneism in 99 percent
is due to an aldosterone producing adenoma, which is unilateral and is referred to as
constant role, or it is due to idiopathic hyper-eldosteroneism, which is bilateral adrenal
hypoplasia, and very rarely it may be due to a carcinoma or adrenal ovary or a genetic inherited
condition referred to as glucocorticoid remedial hyper-eldosteroneism. It is more common in women
than in men and is seen in people usually age 30 to 50 years old. Now it is important to differentiate
high primary hyper-eldosteroneism from other causes of renal wasting, which we will discuss later.
The clinical features, as I've said, is primarily hypertension, the effects of hypokalemia.
There's no edema and there's nocturia. The hypertension may be of any grade from mild to severe.
Often they have established hypertension with the target of damage, namely fungal cardiac
and renal changes. The effects of hypokalemia on the muscle, they get muscle weakness,
approximate myopathy, with air reflexia, latent tetany. So if you find tetany plus
hypertension in an untreated hypertensive patient, this is constant or mental-proofed,
otherwise. The effects on the kidneys are the effects of monolocorticoids. They get polyurea
because they cannot concentrate the urine, polydipsia, vacuolar nephropathy, which often
leads to recurrent infections in pylenophyritus and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The important
point is that there's no edema because of the escape phenomenon and you get the
--- page 15 ---
naturally peptide being released.
In terms of investigation, as I've said, one needs to differentiate from other causes of renal
wasting of potassium and the investigations include biochemical and
radiological and the biochemical investigations involve both basal and
voxel. The basal tests include the urine electrolytes, which will show hypokalemic
alkalosis, plasma renin and plasma aldosterone. I will show your flow diagram for this just now.
The plasma renin is decreased and plasma aldosterone is increased, whether you measure
the concentration or whether you measure the activity.
Those are the basal tests, the provocative tests. What you want to do is you want to establish
a non-suppressibility of the aldosterone and for that one does say an infusion test or a
capital test. The radiological test is a city of the adrenal and this is to determine whether
it's unilateral, in other words, adenoma or bilateral adrenal hyperplasia.
The management is the management of the cause. I was saying to you that you must
differentiate from other renal causes of wastage of potassium and this may be primary
hyperaldosterone, which is what we're talking about. We have a low renin, a high aldosterone,
a non-suppressible aldosterone. Secondary hyperaldosterone that occurs, for example,
was the renal disease or liver disease or cardiac failure, where you get both renin
and aldosterone that are increased and then you get situations of a low renin and low aldosterone.
And low aldosterone. But the management depends on the cause. For primary hyperaldosteroneism,
if it's an adenoma, then it's surgical removal of the adenoma. If it's idiopathic hyperaldosteroneism,
in other words, bilateral adrenal hyperplasia, then they respond poorly to surgery and
mandallocorticoid antagonists, the treatment of choice, either in the form of spironolactone,
which is a non-selective or selector that's epilinarone.
I'm going to give you a flow diagram where you are going to, you are faced to the patient with
hypertension and hyperkalemia. I actually forgot to mention that part of the radiological
leading investigations, and maybe I should just go back, is doing, in addition to doing a CT of
the adrenal, one also does adrenal vein sampling, but I'm not going to go into detail. So if you
--- page 16 ---
are faced with the patient with hypertension and hyperkalemia, one measures the plasma renin,
a supine, plasma or a sitting, plasma renin and plasma aldosterone. A plasma renin may either be
measured as renin activity, that's a PRA or a PRC, which is a plasma renin concentration,
and you determine whether there's an increased renin and increased aldosterone,
if that is so, this is secondary hyperaldosteroneism. If there's a low renin and a low aldosterone,
this is other causes, which I'm not going to go into. They are very rare and complicated
conditions, like syndrome of apparent mandala corticardics, carbon oxalone or licorice and other
causes. If there's a low renin and a high aldosterone, you then want to establish
non-suppressibility of the aldosterone. So first you look at the basal levels. If you're measuring
renin activity, that's its most permanent, then if the aldosterone renin ratio is equal to a greater
than 50 plus an aldosterone level or concentration that is equal to a greater than 555 pico moles
per liter, this would suggest primary hyperaldosteroneism. If you're measuring the concentration of renin
and the aldosterone, then you use the aldosterone renin ratio of more than 90. This equals primary
hyperaldosteroneism and you confirm it with the non-suppressibility of the aldosterone by doing
the capital test or the saline infusion test. So, so much for primary hyperaldosteroneism.
And the last adrenal condition that we will discuss is pheochromocytoma.
Now pheochromocytoma is an involvement of the adrenal medulla and the term pheochromocytoma comes
from greek word pheos, meaning dusky, pheochromo is color and pheochromo is a tumor.
These are usually benign or malignant tumors of the chromaffin cells either within the adrenal
medulla called pheochromocytoma or from the chromaffin producing cells that are in the sympathetic
ganglia and this is called paraganglionmas. So, it's adrenal or adrenal is pheochromocytoma,
ex adrenal is paraganglionma but they generally all can all be termed pheochromocytoma.
And these are usually been as I said benign or malignant tumors that causes excessive secretion
of catechol amines that you know adrenalin and adrenalin which cause hypertension with peculiar
symptoms which draw attention to the diagnosis. It accounts for about one percent of secondary
hypertension and it tends to be more common in women than in men.
Now 95 percent are sporadic and less than 5 percent are familial. The sporadic forms,
--- page 17 ---
in 90 percent of these it's an adrenal cause that's a pheochromocytoma, technically
extra adrenal in 10 percent that's paraganglionma and of the less than 5 percent that are familiar
or what draws you to the attention is that they may be bilateral. They can occur alone but they
often bilateral and they form part of the multiple endocrine and neoplasia or MEN 2A or 2B. And
previously they had what was called a rule of the rule of tint which doesn't hold in all instances
but it can be helpful when you're faced with the no obvious adrenal or salaganglion
and the rule of tint is the 10 percent extra adrenal, 10 percent of malignant, 10 percent
are bilateral especially in children and no 10 percent are bilateral and especially the
familial ones and 10 percent are children, occur in children. And the extra adrenal sites
just for your purposes, the commonest extra adrenal or the paraganglionma sites
in what is referred to as the organs of zucocando and those are in the celiac or the superior
mesenteric ganglia that's the organs of zucocando which lies between the inferior
or superior mesenteric artery. That's accounts for most of the extra adrenal ones but they can
occur in the thorax, in the bladder about 1 percent each and in the neck less than 1 percent.
They may, in the bladder they may and I'll give you the symptoms of those.
And the femmalial forms, where I said multiple endocrine, neocrazia, they also
there's some germline mutations and the six genes include the funhippled endo gene,
the MEN type 2 gene or the RIT gene, the neurofibromatosis type 1 or NF1 gene,
really you don't need to know all of this and the succinate dehydrogenase mutations.
Now what are the clinical features? We all know that the child of symptoms
of headache, sweating and palpitations in a patient with hypertension draws one's attention
to a pheochromocytoma and more recently they now call it the five Ps, pressure that's blood
pressure, pain that's the other P, perspiration that's sweating, palpitations is palpitations
as well as the pain is a headache. So pressure is the blood pressure and the
pallor is in a dish. So the pallor and the pressure are the two additional Ps.
So these may, these are characterized by hypertension which may be in 60 percent
sustained and in 40 percent paroxysmal. Half of those sustained hypertension also have
--- page 18 ---
paroxysms. It's often severe, occasionally malignant type of tension and it's resistant
to standard treatment, in other words often requiring more than five or other agents.
The paroxysms or crises occur in over half of the patients. They last from 10 to 15 minutes
to up to several hours and the precipitating factor is any factor which displaces abdominal
contents in the instance of the tumor being in the abdominal wall. I mean in the abdomen,
for example a palpation or exertion or for example if there's a bladder of pheochromocytoma on
meat irritation. So you will often find a notice in front of or on the head of the
patient's bed to say please do not palpate this patient's abdomen.
The clinical features of the paroxysms include headaches, sweating and palpitations,
these are in variable. They may also, as I said, have a pallor, have apprehension and
sweating during the crisis, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain,
teclicardia, angina or even dyspnea. A third have glycozeuria only during the attack
and the third have hypertension only during the attack. But they can have chronic sort of
hypertension as well as dysglycemia in the form of glucose intolerance or diabetes.
But the important point is that you may in fact not, instead of getting hypertension,
you may get postural hypotension and this occurs especially where the tumor is predominantly
adrenaline secreting, in other words, that it is in the adrenal gland rather than a paragangleoma.
And it occurs because of decreased plasma volume and it is blunted by a sympathetic,
they have a blunted sympathetic response. They may have weight loss and hyperpigmentation
and other things that can occur is cardiac failure either from a long-standing hypertension
or because they may develop a cardiomyopathy. The, I told you about the bladder pheochromocytoma,
they may have paroxysms precipitated by a meat duration and they may even have the hematuria.
The full blood count because of decreased plasma volume, they may have increased
metricrit and erythrocytosis because erythropoetin may be produced by the tumor.
Other effects are hypercalcemia, excessive or increase in ESR and paraxia because of interleukin
6-produce, polyurea and they may even develop rhabdomyolysis with myoglobin neurogramophilia
because of muscle ischemia resulting from the extreme vasoconstriction.
--- page 19 ---
So, regarding the investigations, firstly, one wants to establish hyper secretion
and secondly, one wants to localize the site of the tumor.
So, the investigations, the biochemical investigations for establishing hyper secretion
includes a 24-hour urine catechol amine including 24-hour urine metanetron,
a plasma metanetron which will be elevated but this is the gold standard and not available in
all centers. Serum chromogram and A which will be elevated and the other tests that used to be
done previously are not warranted and the important point is that to establish and ensure that they
are not on any dietary agents or drugs that interfere with these measurements.
So, the 24-hour urine catechol amines ideally these days is the 24-hour urine metanetron
but one can measure the 24-hour urine adrenaline, no adrenaline and dopamine.
For localizing the site of the tumor, one can undertake you, obviously, clinically if there's
a mass of tumor which is usually not the case, chest x-ray and abdominal x-ray to look for masses,
ultrasound of the abdomen again you may not find it there, CT or MRI of the abdomen,
a meta-iodobenza guanidine scan or MIBG scan and more recently pet scans either
six fluorodopamine pet scan or dogetate scan and not used as often these days is a selective
venous sampling or abdominal aotography because the pet scan has largely made these tests
redundant and octrotide scan may not be that helpful because the receptors may not be
the ones that you're looking for.
The management of your chrysochromocytoma like with other endocrine conditions, the surgery is
the treatment of choice and will result in reduction in the catechol amines within a week
but the important point is to pre-op preparation because what you don't want
firstly is unopposed alpha activity or you don't want any
unopposed beta blocker activity. So what you do is you give alpha adenergic blockade
or ideally in this day not so much the non-selective like phenoxybenzamine or
cantolamine but rather selective like pryosicin, doxisicin, otarazicin and then
you never start beta blockers without first preparing them with alpha adenergic blockade
and the reason for that is that if you gave them beta blockers it get unopposed alpha
--- page 20 ---
adenergic activity and the patient will have disastrous hypertension but you can use beta
blockers once you've adequately alpha blocked them because alpha adenergic blockers like
all of these agents that I've spoken about may cause a tachycardia so you want to bring
the rate down with beta blockers. The medical therapy where the patient is not a candidate for
surgery or refuses surgery includes just alpha adenergic blockade or using what they call a
rate limiter like alpha methyl tyrosin in patients who have malignancies and if the patient is
if the patient has a malignancy then and just to point out that oftentimes you can't make out
whether it's benign malignin from the astrology it is only the metastatic deposits that will tell
you that there's there's secondaries or metastatic disease and this is usually seen either on mibg
or with PET scan and the other form of treatment for malignancy including alpha methyl tyrosin is
the mibg scan which although used for diagnostic purposes can be used for malignancy.
Now what is the prognosis if it's a benign tumor the five-year survival rate is more than 95 percent
the recurrent rate is less than 10 percent the category means like I said revert to normal within
a week and a hypertension will resolve if however hypertension does not resolve then ask yourself
whether you've actually removed the the carpet collision or secondly it may be because the
patient has concomitant essential hypertension. If it's a malignant tumor then the five-year
survival rate is less than 50 percent. The important point about follow-up of
your chromosome is to basically see the patient for life so you assess the cat called aiming early
for several years in the asymptomatic patient and for in essence you will actually follow them
for life.
So that's the end of the
