--- page 1 ---
Okay, the third in this series of five lectures is abnormalities of the adrenal gland.
And to understand that the adrenal gland comprises two sections, the adrenal medulla, which produces
the catechol amines, and then there's the adrenal cortex.
Now the adrenal cortex has three zones.
The zona glomerulosa, which produces the medulla corticoids, in particular aldosterone,
but also deoxycorticosteron.
The fasciculata, and this is from outside in, so glomerulosa is the outermost.
The ciculata is a glucocorticoids that's cortisor, or hydrocortisone, and corticosteron.
And then the reticulares, which produces the six hormones, that's the androgens in particular,
the estrogens, the small amounts, and progesterone.
And the main androgen produced by the adrenal is dehydro, at the endosteron of DHEA.
The diseases of the adrenal gland of the medulla is catechol amines, is that in here, sorry.
It's not moving, I'm going to have to stop, share, or let me just try this one, next slide.
Okay, the, as I said, there's adrenal cortex, an adrenal medulla, and they are adrenal because
they're next to the kidney, on top of the kidney, and this just shows the vascular supply.
In particular, of the right adrenal gland, which comes directly, or the aorta, and this
just in a picture form, shows you what I've already explained, of the adrenal cortex production,
adrenal medulla, which produces the catechol amines, which are epinephrine, or adrenalin,
and no epinephrine, which is no adrenalin.
The diseases of the adrenal gland, or the cortical, of the cortex, it may be hyperfunction,
that's primary hyper-allisteronism, that's the zone of glomerulosa, almond relocorticoids,
and Cushing syndrome, or glucocorticoids, and hypofunction is hypo adrenalinism, the
gold standard for which is Addison's disease, that's primary hyper adrenalinism, and then
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which is really the domain of the pediatrician, and I'm not
going to go into it, and in the medulla, hypofunction, which I will discuss, is pyrochromocytoma.
So, to start with adrenal cortex hypofunction, or hypo adrenalinism, or adrenal insufficiency,
--- page 2 ---
in terms of the etiology, this, as I've said, primary, which is Addison's disease, is where
there is increased ACTH, because the problem is primarily in the adrenal, and so this causes
a compensatory, a physiological increase in ACTH, or secondary, in other words, the disease is in
the pituitary hypothalamic region, usually hypo pituitrism, which may be panned or isolated,
and where the primary problem is a reduction in the ACTH, or if you have hypothalamus pituitary
adrenal access suppression due to exogenous steroids of any form. The primary hypo adrenalinism
may be caused by destruction of the gland, as is seen in Addison's disease, which is
autoimmune, and causes idiopatic atrophy, or in our environment, infection, like tuberculosis,
fungal, or viral, infiltrations like amyloid doses, hemochromatosis, metastatic lesions
from a carcinoma or lymphoma, then hemorrhage, as occurs in children with meningococcal septusemia,
which results in untreated in waterhouse phreatics and syndrome, where you get hemorrhage of the
adrenals. Hemorrhage may also occur in the face of people being given anticoagulants,
and infaction may occur, because, for example, prochloride in the states.
Then other problems or causes of primary include postodenollectomycic, for example,
for cushings, or drugs, drugs where there's metabolic failure of hormone production,
either with the use of enzyme inhibitors like ketoconazole, and the metirapon and amino
glutethamide, or where you get increased metabolism or enzyme induces, for example,
anti-tuberculous drugs like epampicin, or even anti-apoleptic drugs like fenotone. So you can
see that tuberculosis may cause it because of destruction of the adrenal gland, or because of
metabolic failure of hormone production, cytotoxic, like mitutane, and then there are
some other weird and unusual acetate receptor gene mutations and acetate blocking agents.
So I just wanted to show you a picture of two people who I would like to believe,
if you have a bit of general knowledge, that you will know who they are. The first person,
who many people recognize, is a former president of the United States, and that's John and Kennedy,
and he had Addison's disease. And as you can see, he looks a little bit question-wide because he
was probably over replaced with hydrocortism. But on the literary side is Jane Austen, who wrote
--- page 3 ---
pride and prejudice and sense and sensibility, who you can see typifies the picture of Addison's
disease. She is lean, and she is hyperpigmented, and I will now go into the clinical features of
of hypodrenalism, typified by Addison's disease, where you get an insidious onset of weight loss,
malays, and parakeps have unknown etiology. Hyperpigmentation, but this only occurs in primary
hypodrenalism, because the hyperpigmentation is due to the production of beta-MSH for each
molecule of acetage that is produced, beta-MSH is also produced. So hyperpigmentation develops
over bony prominences. It's a light brown or brownish-black pigmentation, light browning white people,
and brownish-black in people who are darker shade of pale. And this hyperpigmentation occurs
over bony prominences, like the elbow and scapula, exposed areas, neck, face, and nose.
Palmer creases, I'll show you pictures, also hyperpigmentation in pressure areas, like the
bra area and the waist in women, in the puckle mucosa and gums, over all scars,
and in the nails you get what is referred to as brown nails. Associated vitiligo may also develop
then there's sparse auxiliary and pubic hair, the gastrointestinal tract, anorexia, vomiting,
dehydration, acute abdominal pain, and it's a medical cause of acute abdomen.
Calcification of the ear lobes may also occur in the cardiovascular system. They get postural
hypotension with syncopy. And as a rule on chest x-ray, the heart is usually small and must be very
wary to diagnose hypogly, I mean, diagnose congested heart failure in a patient with the addescence.
The renal effects, because the glucocorticoids have some umbrella corticoid effect, they also
have increased urinary loss of sodium, with nocturia, salt craving, and oliguria. And if untreated,
they develop dehydration and hypovolemia, hypotension, and increase in the serum urea.
It's a prerenal problem, and they may also have hypoglycemia or hypoglycemia.
Hypoglycemia may develop, it's a cause of spontaneous hypoglycemia or fasting hypoglycemia,
amenorrhea and infertility, and susceptibility to infections neurologically. They can develop
psychiatric problems. They may also have benign intracranial hypertension, causing papilladema,
so it's the second endocrine cause. The other one I spoke about was hypoperotharidism.
And they may go into a coma if untreated. There's susceptibility to drugs, like
--- page 4 ---
drugs like ruffampicin or ketoconazole, or anesthetic drugs, and
methadine and morphine. And if untreated, they can go into a life-threatening condition
referred to as adesonian crisis. And adesonian crisis basically is an exaggeration of the effects
of hypodrenalism. It's a medical emergency and the precipitating factors are infection, stress,
and drugs. And the clinical features include paraxia, tachycardia, and hypotension,
vomiting, and domino pain. And if untreated, they go into a coma, do you either drive
or glycemia or dilutional hyponatremia? Now, these are just some pictures with the
point is gone again. Okay, so there's high pigmentation of the gum and the mucosa
of the palma creases. And I already spoken to adesonian crisis.
And what are the how do you investigate a patient for hypodrenalism? Firstly, you must
suspect hypocortizolism and then confirm the hypocortizolism. And secondly, you must establish
the etiology. In other words, is it primary? Is it secondary? Or what is the actually etiology
for all the causes I've already given you? So you suspect hypodrenism on the urea,
in electrolytes, you find a low sodium, a high potassium, and some evidence of prerenal dysfunction
in other words, an increased urea. Hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, on the full blood count,
they may have an anemia with an eosinophilia and raised esa. And once you suspect it,
you want to confirm it. So the baseline test that one does is a serum cortisol. And you do it in
the morning between 0800 hours and 0900 hours, which is the time that you would expect the
serum cortisol to be the highest. So if it's low, when it's supposed to be the highest, then
they've got hypodrenalism. And you measure the ACTH to determine whether it's primary,
in which instance the ACTH will be high. And in secondary, that's the pituitary problem,
the ACTH will be low. The provocative tests that are done include the mainstay is synapton
stimulation test. That's the ACTH test. The short synapton test is
essentially where you give a one microgram dose of intravenous ACTH and measure
the cortisol level at baseline, then at one at 30 minutes, and then at 60 minutes after
injection of the synapton. And you can use the 250 micrograms, but for
--- page 5 ---
a secondary, you only need the one microgram. And in a normal individual, the cortisol will rise
to more than 550 nanomoles per liter. And if it doesn't, then you say the patient has hypodrenalism.
And you wait for the ACTH to, the other test that one can do is a long synapton stimulation test,
or the prolonged or depose synapton stimulation test. This is done over four days. And where you
take on day one, you take a basal, say on cortisol and give one milligram of depose synapton intramascally,
and do the same on day two and day three, one milligram depose synapton and measure the cortisol.
And day four, which is, you only measure the serum cortisol, and you want to know whether the
day four cortisol is more than 550 nanomoles per liter. And the rationale is that if there's a
primary adrenal disease, in other words, the adrenal gland is destroyed. No matter how
much ACTH you will give, there will be no response. And so the cortisol will not rise.
However, if there's secondary hypodrenalism, in other words, the problem is in the pituitary,
then continual stimulation with ACTH will kickstart the adrenal gland, and the cortisol will respond
by the fourth day. A glucagon test can be done where you don't have synapton, but it is not the
ideal test. The management is, for maintenance treatment, you never use synthetic steroids,
you use hydrocortizone or coco-caught, that's for the glucocorticoid, 10 milligrams in the morning,
5 milligrams in the, in the, at lunchtime and in the evening. And you also have to replace the
mandrelocorticoids for primary hypodrenalism, 0.05 fluidicortizone, 0.05 to 0.1 milligram a day.
If you don't have hydrocortizone, then you can, as an alternative, use prednisone,
3 milligrams in the morning in 1.25 milligrams in the evening. And if you look at the doses,
the doses are because of the diurnal variation of cortisol, so you give low dose after
at lunch or at, in the evening. The problem with giving prednisone is that you can't measure
the serum cortisol response. In our environment, if there's evidence of TB, anti-tuberculous therapy,
and very importantly, to provide a medic alert band. So, if the patient arrives in a coma, then
the attending doctor would know what the problem is.
For adisonian crisis, the treatment is fluids, ideally normal or dextrose saline.
Administer hydrocortizone intravenously, 100 milligrams statin, then 6 hourly for 24 to 48 hours.
--- page 6 ---
And treat for a presumed way, you don't have obvious history of non-compliance of their steroids,
then rather treat on speculation for infection with an antibiotic.
So, now it's, what's the time now? Okay, we'll just carry on. We'll carry on for another 15 minutes
and then have a break. So, the next one, no prizes for, for guessing what the, this problem is.
That's Quishing's syndrome. We will go into, this is hyperfunction of the, the zona reticularis,
which produces glucocorticoids resulting in Quishing's syndrome, which is a syndrome that's
produced by excessive glucocorticoid secretion from their adrenal cortex and characterized
by obesity of a peculiar and particular distribution, secondary hypertension and diminished glucose
tolerance, increased protein catabolism, amenorrhea in women and increased liability to infections.
So, so far, I've told you about a few conditions that cause endocrine conditions that cause secondary
hypertension plus diabetes. And thus far, we've had acromegaly and now Quishing's. But you'll see
that other endocrine conditions that cause, I put secondary hypertension and diabetes include
failed chromocytoma and con syndrome.
So, Quishing's syndrome. Remember, Quishing's syndrome is any cause or hypercortisolimia.
But Quishing's syndrome may be primary in 20 to 25%. It may be secondary, the vast majority,
75%. And that is when it's referred to as Quishing's disease.
Then there's ectopic acetate or CRH secretion, drugs, and pseudocushions.
So, primary in which accounts, in other words, the problem is in that adrenal accounts for 20
to 25% and it's unilateral and maybe an adenoma or a carcinoma and it's unilateral.
Secondary is where the problem is in the pituitary hypothalamus.
And it's referred to as Quishing's disease when it's in the pituitary and is caused by
increased acetate production usually from a micro adenoma in the pituitary gland.
That means it's less than 10 millimeters. Or it may be increased CRH or corticotropin
releasing hormone secretion from the hypothalamus, but they all sort of secondary.
Ectopic acetate or CRH secretion occurs in essence in patients who have a malignancy
like C. bronchus. This is a small cell C. Or even bronchial adenoma or bronchial carcinoma,
--- page 7 ---
carcinoma of the, I mean bronchial carcinoid and then carcinoma of the pancreas and other ovarian
tumors. But the important point here is usually the biochemical features,
out of the clinical features or occur before the clinical features develop because the patient
usually dies before that. Drugs like exogenous cortisol preparations and pseudo-quishings
which is for your purposes seen typically with alcohol and psychiatric or depressive illnesses.
And the big problem is that the clinical features or cushings also include depression and it's
difficult to decide whether this is Quishing's causing hypocortizoleemia or this is depression
that is causing pseudo-quishings. Suffice it to say that it is only the primary or the adrenal
one in which you'll get unilateral disease. And all the other instances by the asterisks
is where you get bilateral adrenal hyperplays. And these facts are important, these points are
important when one is investigating a patient. Because although Quishing's syndrome is the
easiest one and the one most recognizable by individuals, it is the most difficult to,
so it's the easiest one to teach on, but the most difficult one to actually investigate
and treat because of largely overlapping results.
So the clinical features which I have shown you one of and which I'm going to show you more
is again, a multi-system. It's characterized by in the face, moon face,
male flush and in the face you also get telangictasia and exothermos because of excessive fat deposits
retroobically. Herseutism is an important feature in the upper lip and the jaw, acne of the face,
chest and shoulders and classically a disproportionate obesity or a lemon on a
mastic obesity where you get trunkal obesity with thin arms and legs.
And other areas of fat deposits like at the back of the neck, a buffalo or interscapular
buffalo hump that's increased into scapular fat or episterno.
Purple stria, now a lot of women and also obese men who lose weight, who will develop
stria, but these are usually pale stria. In Quishing's syndrome, this is characterized
by what is referred to as purple stria which are wide, in other words more than one centimeter
and seen on the flanks, the hips, the abdomen, the auxiliary fold and the thighs. And essentially
--- page 8 ---
occurs because you get thinning of the skin and it exposes the small vessels and the capillaries
which rupture and causing the purple or lemon stria. Proximal myopathy because of the protein
metabolism, secondary hypertension because of the mandrelocorticoid effect of glucocorticoid
so you get sodium and water retention, dysglycemia either in the form of glucose intolerance or
pre-diabetes or diabetes. Menstrual disturbances, even area and infertility, psychiatric
disturbance are very important like I mentioned, either neurosis or psychosis like depression
or paranoid psychosis, osteoporosis will develop because of the excessive steroids, edema,
increased liability to infection, edema develops because of the capillary fragility
and other features of insulin resistance as we call it, acanthosis, niglicants and other features
in asthutism of excessive androgens like acne and oligo or amenorrhea. So the excessive androgens
will cause her asthutism, acne and oligo or amenorrhea. So these are some of the pictures.
This is a lady with cushions that I showed you earlier on, you can see her mela flush,
she's got a buffalo ham. And then I said, it's a lemon and a matchstick on a matchstick so they have
very thin arms and legs and very increased tranquil obesity and look at here.
So normally, you know, you get this morbid obesity or obesity as we see it in our population,
but the difference there is you get global obesity. So the limbs are obese, then they also have a
butter where you can actually lay a table on as opposed to in a patient with cushions
where you get protein catabolism. So you get wasting of the of the proximal muscles.
These are the vivid stria that I was talking to you about. That's more than a centimeter wide
and they purple. Now, what about investigations? There are ancillary investigations and then they
are diagnostic investigations. The ancillary investigations, remember lots of people
who by the time they over 40 will almost look quishing on it. So they especially women,
they start developing a round face at the obese and then in addition, they have diabetes and
hypertension because they are obese and then one is inclined to consider quishing syndrome.
But there are more people who just have all of these problems because of simple overeating
and obesity rather than quishing syndrome. So the ancillary tests that one does
--- page 9 ---
includes urea and electrolytes which will show a hypokalemic alkalosis, a full blood count
which will show increased red cells and or hemoglobin or even polycythemia. A low white cell count,
especially the iesinophils are decreased and a low ESR. That's the full blood count.
And then the chest x-ray, you're looking for evidence of hypertension.
Or you're even looking for evidence of etiology. So if you have white and mediastinum
that might suggest that there's a pymoma or some other problem for a bronchial lesion.
The ECG, looking for evidence of hypertension and hypokalemia,
a bone mineral density is important because of the osteoporosis that develops with excessive
steroids. Then other lipid abnormalities like hypertribulisidemia and excessive calcium secretion.
But to move to diagnostic investigations or quishings, the aim is to establish hypocortizolism
and to determine the cause both the site and the etiology by biochemical and radiological means.
And I'm not again going to go into full details this you should get in chemical pathology.
But in essence, the biochemical tests undertaken to establish cortisol hyper secretion of
utmost importance is the increase in 24-hour urine free cortisol.
So the 24-hour urine free cortisol is increased. And then if one looks at the
diurnal variation, I told you it's highest in the morning, it's lowest at midnight.
If you measure the midnight serum cortisol or salivary cortisol, this will be increased.
And then one does provocative tests in particular dexamethasone suppression tests of the DST.
Either an overnight or one milligram DST where there's no suppression of serum cortisol by the
next day. So you give the dexamethasone at 11 o'clock and measure the cortisol between 8 and 9 o'clock.
Then a standard, what you call a standard low dose dexamethasone suppression test,
which is 0.5 milligram six hourly for 48 hours. And you measure the serum cortisol
on the third day. And if there's a normal individual, the cortisol should fall. If it doesn't fall,
all you can say is that there's hyper cortisolism.
The next step is to establish the cause. In other words, the SART. Is it primary?
Is it secondary? Or is it ectopic? And for that, you do the tests that are listed on the slide.
--- page 10 ---
The serum acetate, the high dose dexamethasone suppression test.
The high dose overnight dexamethasone 8 milligrams suppression test. The CRF DDAVP test,
where you measure acetation cortisol response. And then getting more intricate and detailed
and interventional is the inferior petrosal sinus sampling with and without the injection
of corticotropin releasing factor. Now, this is very complicated. But just for you to understand
that what you are aiming in serum acetate is to determine whether it's primary, in which instance
the acetate will be low. If the acetate is high, this would mean either that it's secondary
or ectopic. And so most of the other tests that are done are done to distinguish
a pituitary from ectopic cause. So in a high dose standard dexamethasone suppression test,
we give two milligrams of dexamethasone 6 hourly for 48 hours and measure cortisol.
I measure the urine free cortisol on day one, day two, as well as post that's day three.
And in a normal, or rather in a normal individual, you get total suppression of the urine free cortisol.
In a patient with a pituitary cause, there'll be 90% suppression of the urine free cortisol
by the third day with the standard high dose, whereas if it's a topic, it's high and you get no
suppression. And the same principle holds for the high dose overnight dexamethasone suppression
test over eight milligrams. Here, it's also to separate a topic from pituitary. You measure
the cortisol the day before you don't really have t