--- page 1 ---
is the diagnosis and classification as well as the epidemiology of diabetes.
Now, as you know, diabetes is a state of chronic hypoglycemia
associated with metabolic problems other than glucose metabolism,
and which is due to either a defect or abnormality of insulin secretion and or action.
And when compared with the general population, the mortality is increased,
death is increased 4 to 7 fold in type 1 and 2 to 3 fold in type 2 diabetes.
And if untreated needs to complications, both the specific microvascular as well as the microvascular,
the retinopathy in the property and neuropathy and the nonspecific or atherosclerotic
complications that's peripheral vascular disease, cardiovascular disease or coronary artery disease
and cerebral vascular disease.
But that there is now clear evidence that improved control of diabetes will result either in the prevention
or delay in the onset and progression of in particular the microvascular complications.
So for the management objectives, the questions to ask is what is to be achieved, how and why.
The what is to be achieved is normal or uglycemia with adequate control of blood pressure,
lipids and as well as obesity with the use of diet and exercise as lifestyle modification,
oral anti-diabetic agents and insulin and other newer injectables.
The why is as I've said to either prevent the onset or delay the progression of its chronic complications.
Dr. Piri will discuss the how and the why and also the what.
--- page 2 ---
In terms of classification and diagnosis, they are what you have to understand is that
there are clinical stages on the x-axis and ecological types on the y-axis.
The clinical stages are normal glycemia, that's normal glucose regulation or hyperglycemia
may be the glucose intolerance or impaired glucose regulation or as the Americans refer to it
as pre-diabetes, which comprises encompasses both impaired glucose tolerance, that's IGT
as well as impaired fasting glucose or IFG as well as diabetes.
So diabetes may be not insulin requiring insulin requiring for control or insulin requiring for survival.
Therefore, etiological types and that's type one, type two, other specific types and gestational diabetes.
But it is important to note that there is a relationship between the three clinical stages of hyperglycemia
and types and that they may move from one clinical stage to another.
So you may see a patient at a particular time and it is important that you don't clearly identify what the etiological type
is until you've done a couple of tests or until the patient progresses in one way or the other.
So type one, they may start with normal glucose regulation and go all the way to the typical form of insulin requiring for survival.
On the other hand, the type two passes through various stages to get diabetes, which may be not insulin requiring,
that means oral agents, and then going on to insulin requiring for control.
And in acute cases of acute hyperglycemia crisis may require insulin requiring for survival at that particular moment in time.
And then go back to base of either requiring insulin for control or not insulin requiring.
Then the other specific types which account for a very small minority, again, showing the same pictures type two gestational diabetes is glucose intolerance that is first detected during pregnancy.
--- page 3 ---
With respect to the etiological types, type one, which accounts for five to ten percent of all diabetes may either be autoimmune, that's the typical type one,
or it may be idiopathic. Type two, which accounts for the vast majority, that's over 90%, starts off with insulin resistance,
but fasting hyperglycemia only becomes manifest when there's insulin secretory defect.
Other specific types account for the small minority, but those in which the etiology has been clearly identified and as shown on the slide,
may be genetic defects of beta cell function, or insulin secretion, diseases of the exochrome pancreas,
endocrineopathies like we've discussed earlier, drug or chemical induced infections, uncommon immune mediated, and other genetic syndrome.
Gestational diabetes is glucose intolerance that is first detected during pregnancy, and maybe that is when it's first detected,
or it may be diabetes mellitus that's been there and now presents in pregnancy.
In 2000, so this classification I've given you was the earlier classification, the ADA stands for Medical Diabetes Association,
WHO for World Health Organization.
Now in 2019, the WHO, but not the ADA, has revised the classification, all they've done is still have the type one and the type two,
and they have the hyperglycemia during pregnancy, but they've introduced two other forms, hybrid form of diabetes and unclassified.
And so the other specific types is the same, type one is the same, type two is the same.
The hybrid form is the slowly evolving immune mediated diabetes of adults or LADA, and what was previously referred to as LADA,
and the ketosis prone type two, which has the phenotype of type two, but presents with decay.
Unclassified diabetes is a category that must only be temporarily used when there's not a clear diagnostic category,
especially close to the time of the diagnosis of diabetes, which is what I was referring to you regarding the clinical stages and the etiological types.
And hyperglycemia first detected in pregnancy may include a patient who's already known to have diabetes,
--- page 4 ---
who hasn't been known to have diabetes, but has diabetes first detected in pregnancy and continues after pregnancy.
And then there's gestational diabetes, which is only found during pregnancy.
But for you, the important point is to be able to distinguish between type one and type two.
So, type one, in terms of the epidemiology, type one occurs in the younger individual, type two in the older,
type one is lean because they've got no insulin and insulin is important for deposition of fat,
whereas the type two is because they have high insulin and insulin resistance usually induced by overweight.
The type one, technically, is more commonly found in European, whereas type two in all ethnicities.
Type one tends to be seasonal in spring and autumn with the onset of type one,
and is thought to be precipitated by viral infection, whereas in type two, there's no such association.
In terms of hereditary or hereditary, type one is associated with HLA-DQAO-DQB, that's HLA-DR-304,
that was the previous terminology, while in type two, there's no HLA link.
In type one, there's a 30 to 35% concordance rate, whereas in type two, there's a 90% concordance rate.
Just to elaborate that further, in the pathogenesis in type one, is an absolute insulin deficiency,
which if uncontrolled rapidly lead to diabetic ketoacidosis, coma, and death,
while in type two, as I said, the initial initiating event is insulin resistance,
and as it gets worse, you get insulin deficiency, and at which point you get fasting hyperglycemia or detectable diabetes.
There's profound effect of autoimmunity in type one, the glutamic acid decaboxelase antibody or anti-gad antibody.
I would sell antibody, IA2 antibody and insulin antibody, whereas there's no autoimmunity in type two.
--- page 5 ---
The clinical, I've mentioned some of them, if untreated, type one rapidly goes into ketoacidosis,
whereas if there's a hypoglycemic crisis, or in type two, it's usually a hyperosmolar hypoglycemia,
previously referred to hypoosmolar non-ketotic hypoglycemia.
In type one, insulin treatment is required for survival, whereas in type two, it's required for control.
Generally, type one tends to be lean, type two overweight, and clinically, in terms of age,
type one occurs in people younger than 35 years, whereas type two older, in older than 35.
Biochemically, you can do the glucagon test, so you can measure the antibodies, you do the glucagon test,
and if the glucose is, are we talking about type one now?
If the glucose is high, you can do a random C peptide, and if the level is low in the face of high,
you just type one, or you can do a glucagon test, where you measure the C peptide before,
and six minutes after the injection of glucagon, and with type one, you will get the certain cut points,
which I'm not going to go into, but shows a low C peptide, they've got type one,
whereas with type two, if you do the glucagon test, then there's a normal, high C peptide.
Now, for the diagnostic criteria, these may be glucose-based, or on the basis of a surrogate marker,
which is glycosylated, or glycoated hemoglobin, or hemoglobin A1C,
and they're different criteria proposed by the World Health Organization, that's WHO,
and the American Diabetes Association, or ADA, based on the WHO classification,
and which is used universally,
--- page 6 ---
if one does the venous plasma glucose, a person is defined as having a normal venous plasma glucose,
if the fasting glucose is less than 6.1, and during the GTT, the 2-hour plasma glucose is less than 7.8.
Impaired fasting glucose, or impaired fasting glycemia, or IFG, is if during a GTT, the fasting plasma glucose
is equal to greater than 6.1, but less than 7, and if measured, the 2-hour plasma glucose is less than 7.8.
In other words, only the fasting glucose is abnormal.
Impaired glucose tolerance, or IGT, is if during the GTT, the fasting glucose is less than 7,
if measured, and the 2-hour plasma glucose is between 7.8, but less than 11.1,
and IFG and IGT are in combination referred to as impaired glucose regulation, or by the American Diabetes Association pre-diabetes.
Diabetes is diagnosed if the fasting plasma glucose is equal to greater than 7,
or the 2-hour plasma glucose is equal to greater than 11.1, but I'm going to make some comments about diagnosing diabetes.
The American Diabetes Association has proposed likely different criteria, especially for the fasting plasma glucose,
and they categorize based on fasting plasma glucose, or a GTT, and based on the fasting plasma glucose,
a normal fasting glucose is less than 5.6, which is lower than the WHO of 6.1.
So you're going to have more people who would describe CMEA, impaired fasting glucose, between 5.6 and less than 7,
and diabetes if the fasting plasma glucose is equal to greater than 7.
If GTT is done, the category is referred to as normal glucose tolerance if the 2-hour plasma glucose during GTT is less than 7.8.
So the same as WHO, IGT also the same between 7.8 and 11.1, and diabetes if the 2-hour plasma glucose is 11.1 millimoles per liter or more.
The important thing is to report which test is to be used, and that the diagnosis of diabetes is always a provisional diagnosis
--- page 7 ---
and must always be confirmed on another day, either with the same test.
So if you only did a fasting plasma glucose, then you can do a GTT on the next occasion, so you'll have a 2-hour and a fasting.
The importance of all of this is that laying a diagnosis of diabetes on an individual actually puts that person at risk for insurance purposes,
for employment, and for psychological purposes, you must always be very careful before you make a firm diagnosis of diabetes.
So to sum up all of this, the ADA of 2010, from the WHO of 2011, the diagnosis of diabetes can be based on a fasting plasma glucose,
a 2-hour or a random plasma glucose or a glycated hemoglobin at the same gluten A1c.
And according to the ADA, since 2010, up to the current time, the diagnosis of diabetes can be based on the HPA1c of equal to or greater than 6.5%,
or a fasting plasma glucose of equal to or greater than 7 millimoles per liter, or a 2-hour plasma glucose during the GTT of 11.1 millimoles per liter,
or in the case of classic symptoms or hypoglycemic crisis if the random plasma glucose is 11.1.
And as I've said earlier, the diagnosis of diabetes must be confirmed by a repeat test in the absence of unequivocal hypoglycemia.
The process for the GTT is that there's no caloric intake for 8 hours, and a 75 gram oral glucose tolerance test based on WHO,
guidelines at 75 grams of anhydrous glucose dissolved in water, or 250 moles of glucose aid, and that the HPA1c,
this must be done in a lab with a method that is certified by the National Glyco and Hemoglobin Certification Program
and standardized to the DCCT assay, that's the diabetes control and complication trial assay.
The WHO for diabetes, the glucose based is as for the earlier one, that's the fasting plasma glucose of equal to or greater than 7,
and or a 2-hour plasma glucose of 11.1 or more, or an HPA1c of 6.5% or more.
So in other words, similar to ADA, and again, must be confirmed by a repeat test and must be done by standardized HPA1c methods.
And then in 2010, in addition, now we're talking about the ADA, in addition to saying that you can use the HPA1c of 6.5% or more,
--- page 8 ---
I've said that we can introduce a category of increased risk for diabetes, glucose based, that's impaired fasting glucose of 5.6 to 6.1,
IGT, 2-hour plasma glucose of 7.8 to 11, and then introduce now the intermediate types of HPA1c.
In other words, between 5.7% to 6.4%.
But for all risks to understand the risk is contained, for all the tests, the risk is continuous.
That is, it extends below the lower limit of the range and gets much higher at the higher end of the range.
And that if you find any of these, a fasting plasma glucose, as IGT or the 2-hour plasma glucose, or an HPA1c, that's above 5.6% but less than 6.5%, you can start preventive interventions.
WHO has not adopted that because there is no evidence from long-term studies that treating patients with IFG in particular will decrease microbascular complications.
Now, what about screening?
The indications for screening for type 2 diabetes is if the patient, this is now testing for diabetes in the asymptomatic presumed healthy subject.
So, what will be indication for screening by any of the methods, fasting, 2-hour plasma glucose, HPA1c or whatever, is in patients age 45 years or over, then all individuals age 45 years and over should have one of the screening methods,
especially if they are overweight, in other words, the BMI is equal to greater than 25 kilograms per meter squared.
And if normal to repeat 3 yearly, if they are under 45, then if they are overweight, that's again BMI, 25 or more, plus they have one other risk factor, like physical in activity,
family history of diabetes in a first-degree relative, high-risk ethnic group like Pima Indians, the Pacific Islanders and migrant Asian Indians in Fiji, in South Africa, in the UK or wherever.
Justational diabetes or baby, big babies, more than 4 kilograms, IFG or IGT, hypertension, dyslipidemia, polycystic ovarian syndrome and vascular disease.
So, just to give you some idea about how the burden of diabetes is that from the 10th edition of the International Diabetes Federation at the end of 2021, it's been shown that the number of people with diabetes in the world was estimated at 537 million.
This is more than HIV, TB and malaria put together, and it is projected to increase by 46% by 2045 to 783 million.
Also, that the greatest increase is expected for the Africa region, 134% increase from 24 million in 2021 to 55 million in 2045.
So, to conclude this lecture, the diabetes is a common non-communicable disease and an important cause of morbidity and mortality, but they are clearly identifiable and modifiable risk factors for their development.
--- page 9 ---
And it is important to detect and treat early both diabetes and its complications.
So, that's the end of this.
And the last lecture is on the complications of diabetes.
Okay, so, as I'm sure you are aware, or you've heard of, because diabetes is so common, and everyone has someone in the family.
Often with type 2 diabetes and occasionally with type 1 diabetes and that the complications can be acute or chronic.
And the acute complications include the metabolic complications like hyper or hypoglycemia and electric acidosis, or that's the metabolic acute complications or the infections like acute infections like pneumonia,
arthritis, vaginal infections or chronic infections like tuberculosis.
But when we talk about chronic complications of diabetes, we talk about the major and other complications.
The major complications are the specific microvascular complications, that's retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy,
and the nonspecific or atherosclerotic macrovascular complications, that's cardiovascular disease, usually coronary artery disease, but also now cardiomyopathy,
the cerebral vascular disease and peripheral vascular disease, and then there are a whole host of other chronic complications, such as diabetic foot, which is a combination of vascular neuropathy and infection,
cataracts and skin and connective diseases and rheumatological disease and there's a whole host of other systems.
But for our purposes today, we're going to be discussing the chronic microvascular complications,
retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy, and leave this to the specific departments, that's cardiology, neurology and surgery.
Just an overview, mitrovascular complications, retinopathy is present in 90% of type 1 and 20% to 90% of type 2, nephropathy in about a third of type 1 and 3% to 15% of type 2,
and neuropathy in 10% to 100% of all patients of both type 1 and type 2, and with respect to the macrovascular complications, and compared with the general population,
the risk of cardiovascular disease is increased 2 to 4-fold and strokes by 2-fold.
One important point is that microvascular complications occur both in type 1 and in type 2, regarding the onset of type 1 of the complications,
--- page 10 ---
because one can only really date when type 1 diabetes is developed because they declare themselves a DKA, it's been shown that these chronic complications occur years after the diagnosis.
In type 2 diabetes, if you had the patient who had IGT and you were following the patient, then you can date the date of diagnosis and will also show they do occur some years.
However, in many instances, it may be the mode of presentation. In other words, the complications are found at presentational.
Regarding the pathogenesis, these microvascular complications are specific for diabetes, they do not occur in other conditions and it is related to the prolonged or rather the duration and the degree of hyperglycemia.
They are other factors, but without hyperglycemia, you won't get them. The other factors include metabolic genetic vascular and environmental factors, but the major determinants are the duration and the degree of hyperglycemia.
And that hyperglycemia is important, both for the initiation and the progression of the complications, and also there's an interrelationship between the different microvascular complications, in particular, the retinopathy and the properties.
What happens in the eye happens in the kidney. The means of detecting it is by symptoms, by clinical examination, and by specific investigations.
Now, I'm going to first speak to diabetic nephropathy, and what I'm showing you is the typical chemistry of Wilson nephropathy or glomerulus in an electron microscopy.
And diabetic nephropathy or diabetes nephropathy is characterized by these four features, persistent proteinuria, a progressive decline in renal function, or GFR, arterial hypertension, and retinopathy.
It is, as I've said, it is a relation, the duration of diabetes. It's the prevalence is a third in type 1 and 15% in type 2.
The incidence, prevalence means as a particular time, the incidence, if you track the patient from the diagnosis, the diabetes duration is most important.
In type 1, it peaks at about 15 years, whereas in type 2, it can peak earlier, mainly b