--- page 11 ---
ecause you often don't know when it started.
The renal involvement in diabetes, diabetic nephropathy is where there's diabetic glomerulus sclerosis.
That's that chemo-steel Wilson glomerulus that I was showing you.
But there are other causes of renal involvement in diabetes, and these include infections like pylonephritis, atherosclerosis, causing vascular renal vascular disease,
nephrotoxic drugs like amicasein, and then radio contrast injury, and that's how you'll always find this sort of caution when you're ordering an radiological investigation that requires radio contrast.
And then non-diabetic renal disease, like any other human being, for example, glomerular nephritis.
And the other point to understand is that in 3 to 8% of patients, you may get proteinuria that is not related to diabetes.
So diabetes, there's a slow answer to proteinuria that goes from nothing to micro-ominuria to persistent proteinuria.
But if you have a sudden, if there are certain conditions where you'll say, no, this is not diabetic renal disease, the patient has something else.
So what will make you think about, I've already spoken about the other causes of renal disease, then diabetic neuropathy.
But what you need to understand is that if you have the following problems, then you need to do a renal biopsy.
Because I told you, you can have plomerular nephritis, you can have anything.
So the presence of microscopic hematuria, you do not get hematuria with diabetic neuropathy.
Microscopic hematuria, a sudden onset of proteinuria or nephrotic syndrome, the presence of red cell casts in the urine, a rapid decline in renal function,
a short duration in particular type 1 diabetes of less than 5 years.
And if you have absence of retinopathy on clinical examination, that individual requires a remote biopsy.
So just a few words about the pathophysiology and with respect to definitions and natural history and risk factors is that
there are functional changes and morphological changes.
The functional changes are the level of proteinuria.
So you get established over nephropathy and incipient nephropathy.
--- page 12 ---
The morphological changes are what you find on histology.
And like I said when I said that diabetic nephropathy just remembers, characterized by persistent proteinuria,
decline in renal function, arterial hypertension and retinopathy.
That's the clinical features.
Now, the functional changes, it's a level of protein or albumin excretion that is important.
Established over nephropathy is where you get persistent proteinuria.
And that means a urine protein excretion that is dipstick detectable, not dipstick, dipstick detectable,
and which implies a protein excretion of more than 500 milligrams or 0.5 grams per day.
Or this is equivalent, remember that although albumin is the major protein, there are other proteins in the urine, like globulin etc.
And so persistent proteinuria is where the urine protein excretion is more than 500 milligrams or a urine albumin excretion of more than 300 milligrams a day,
or if on a timed specimen, more than 200 micrograms per minute.
An incipient diabetic nephropathy is referred to by a diabetologist as micro albuminuria.
And that means an albumin excretion rate between normal and persistent proteinuria.
So there's an albumin excretion rate of between 30 and 300 milligrams per day.
That's between 24 hours measured by radioimmuno assay.
Or if you do it on a timed sample, like a 12 hours overnight sample, 20 to 200 micrograms per minute.
Now what about morphological versus functional change?
It is important to understand that glomerulus sclerosis, as I've told you, the picture I showed you,
this will occur in more than 90% of type 1 diabetes after 10 years duration.
But diabetic nephropathy, which I have defined as a problem of persistent proteinuria,
--- page 13 ---
progressive decline in the renal function, systemic hypertension and retinopathy,
only develops in 35 to 40% of people with diabetes.
And we're talking about type 1 because we can determine the duration.
Then there's an issue of the natural history of diabetic nephropathy,
which is defined as going through five stages.
The first stage being glomerular hyperfiltration, second stage is the silent stage,
the third stage is incipient diabetic nephropathy or micro albuminuria,
stage 4 is established nephropathy or overt nephropathy,
and stage 5 is in stage renal failure.
And this slide will show you, or shows you, that's the five stages, which is based on the functional changes
of the renal albumin excretion and JFR, the clinical that the onset two to three years,
more than five years, and more than 10 years and 20 years.
And then what morphologically, in other words, an histology, initially even at the onset
when everything is normal, you may get hypertrophy.
And then from stage two onwards, in other words, from two to three years after the onset of diabetes,
if you do electron microscopy, you'll find glomerular sclerosis all the way
with respect to the clinical features.
So we've got the functional changes, or let's just speak to the functional changes.
So the albumin excretion, the urine albumin excretion only starts becoming abnormal in stage 3 or incipient nephropathy.
And then you get persistent proteinuria from stage 4, and this goes on all the way.
--- page 14 ---
The JFR is increased in hyperfiltration and the silent stage, as well as the incipient stage,
then it starts decreasing at the onset of persistent proteinuria, continues to decrease,
and also the serum creatinine starts to rise in stage 5.
Clinically, these stage 1 is at the onset.
This occurs at about 2 to 3 years.
Stage 3 is more than 5 years.
Now you start, the BP is still normal in stage 3.
It is only when there's overt nephropathy that hypertension for diabetes will become manifest,
and this will persist in stage 5, which only develops after 20 years.
For the retinopathy, retinineopathy only starts developing.
After the onset of established nephropathy, so you may see nothing up to stage 3.
So what are the clinical features?
I've told you and I'm going to repeat it.
It's persistent proteinuria and dipstick, blood pressure is elevated, and the presence of retinopathy.
But other systems are also involved, like the cardiovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, and neuropathy.
And I've defined for you what is incipient nephropathy, establishment of property,
when the JFR changes, and the fact that the serum creatinine only starts increasing at a late stage.
And that the JFR, at the point of persistent proteinuria or established nephropathy,
declines at 1 minute per year per month.
So from the onset of established nephropathy, the patient has about 7 years to end stage renal disease if untreated.
--- page 15 ---
The importance of early detection is that if you start treating incipient nephropathy,
it will not only prevent but also delay the onset of overt nephropathy as well as end stage renal failure.
Once they develop overt nephropathy, treatment of the onset will also prevent or decrease the progression to end stage renal failure.
How can one detect nephropathy or clinically is elevation of the blood pressure in particular in patients with type 1 diabetes?
Because in type 2 we know you could get associated with essential hypertension.
Looking at the urine albumin excretion to see whether they've got micro albuminuria or persistent proteinuria,
measuring the JFR by EJFR or creatinine clearance or isotope.
The serum urine creatinine, and like I said, the creatinine only starts increasing and the JFR is less than 50 miles per minute.
And lastly, diminishing insulin requirements and recurrent hypoglycemia in a patient who's on insulin may also be an indicator of the presence of nephropathy.
And so the need to refer for the chronic renal program early.
These are the stages of chronic kidney disease based on the JFR where you have some abnormality on the pathological urine blood imaging test and stage 1 to stage 5.
You know this is stage 1 is where you have JFR of more than 90, stage 2, 60 to 89, stage 3 is 45 to 59 and stage 3 be 30 to 30 to 44.
Stage 4 is severely diminished JFR 15 to 29 and stage 5 is kidney failure and where the JFR is less than 15 or the patient's dialysis requiring.
Now the management of nephropathy, the goals of therapy is to prevent or delay the progression of renal disease and to improve the clinical outcome to prolong survival and decrease the mortality and delay the time to dialysis or renal transplant.
So you want to prevent the onset and if you haven't prevented the onset, you want to prevent to delay the progression.
And if they've already developed over nephropathy, the glycemic control has less influence on progression to end stage renal failure than does hypertension since this is glycemic control.
But the management of diabetic nephropathy per se doesn't only imply glucose control.
It's important and perhaps more important once you develop over nephropathy for blood pressure control and control of the albuminuria.
Glucose control dietary protein restriction of 0.8 to 1 kg per kg per day.
And then once you have renal failure, dialysis, either umodialysis or in the dye instances where you don't have the facility see chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis and ideally transplantation.
--- page 16 ---
The general measures are to stop smoking, decrease weight of the obese and to avoid drugs that worsen kidney function.
And serial investigations, when the serum creatinine is more than 500 or equal to 500 micromoles per liter, then one needs to assess for the chronic renal program.
And in such as ours, we would do that at a lower level of 250 micromoles per liter.
And when the JFR is less than 20 most per minute, then you assess it also for the chronic renal program.
In other words, refer to a joint team of diabetes, renal physicians, plus the dietitians, social workers and nursing staff.
So I hope I've given you a message that glycemic control blood pressure and dietary protein important for management of diabetic non property and can provide effective control.
And that once you have over nephropathy blood pressure control is more important.
Now, what about glycemic control, some pointers that your therapeutic requirements may change or decrease as a renal function deteriorates.
And if you have some indication that the incident requirements are decreasing in others, if you have recurrent hypoglycemia, ask yourself the patient has a renal impairment.
If the patient is an oral anti diabetic agents, what some people refer to oral hypoglycemic agents or would that not strictly true because some drugs like I met form an anti hypoglycemic and not anti diabetic.
The JFR is less than 70 most per minute by go on nights. Technically should stop. It's contraindicated. If they also stop the soprano area.
If they're long acting like you're going to might, but you can use the short acting one like the side and the side until the JFR is less than 30 most when you stop all oral agents.
Management of hypertension or proteinuria is personal foremost the inhibitors or where they have side effects like a cough to that then use angiotensin receptor blockers or arms.
Calcium antagonist, but you can use anything calcium antagonist loop diuretics alpha blockers or beta blockers.
So, again, this is just reiterating that ACE inhibitors are used for persistent albuminuria, whether this is micro or persistent proteinuria, whether they normal tens of why potential.
When they develop, even when they develop random insufficiency of the creatinine of more than 133 micromoles for data.
Now, to move to diabetic retinopathy.
Again, remember this is a microvascular complication.
So, diabetes related, let's look at it overall. The eye may be involved in several way in diabetes.
Maybe diabetic retinopathy, it may be cataract, it may be neurological like a neuropathy, maybe other retinovascular disease or it may be, which is disease.
--- page 17 ---
Diabetic, I mean, cataracts, maybe posterior subcapsular cataract or snowflake.
The neuropathies may be optic neuropathy or even papillopathy, maybe ocular nerve palsies, that's a mononuritis.
The third, fourth and sixth nerve may even be seventh nerve and autonomic pupillary dysfunction.
Other retinovascular disease includes arterial occlusion and venous occlusion.
And vitreous disease includes vitreous hemorrhage and asteroidies, high losses.
Now, diabetic retinopathy may be background, pre proliferative or proliferative and is defined as retinopathy, macularpathy, whether the patient has photocoagulation and other lesions.
But the background problems or changes, which hopefully you know by now, includes the classical ones of micro aneurysm, the dot and blot hemorrhages and hard accidents.
Once they develop pre proliferative changes, these include venous anomalies, either beading, looping or duplication.
I'll show you pictures, intra retinomicrobascular abnormalities or Hermes, the cotton wool spots, more than five and deep round images.
And then this proliferative retinopathy, proliferative retinopathy is characterized by new vessel formation or new vascularization, which may be at the disc, that's NVD near a new vascularization at the disc or elsewhere, NVE.
And the complications of new vessel formation, remember, these are fragile new vessels, these new vessels, they hemorrhage, they burst.
So you get pre retinol or subhighloid hemorrhages, which progress to vitreous hemorrhages, which then lead to fibrosis, which then leads to retinol detachment.
Or it may involve the iris, you call rubiosis irides, it sprints to the lens capsule and you get glaucoma.
So these are pictures of dots, dots and blots, and not shown where you are supposed to show hard exirates, but I'll show you to you on the next slide or the following slide.
This is cotton wool spots.
This is Venus beading, as you can see, so this is pre proliferative.
And then there's a new vessel formation near the disc or elsewhere, can you see all of these?
You can see how fragile they are, even if it's not sort of to the naked eye.
Then following laser fibrosis, once you get, sometimes happens just to the vitreous hemorrhage or following laser photocoagulation.
This is the pre retinol hemorrhage or the subhighloid hemorrhage.
--- page 18 ---
This is the vitreous hemorrhage where the patient and the physician can't see anything and ultimately retinol detachment.
The maculopathy, remember the way to see the macula is ask the patient to look directly into your ophthalmoscope and move and that will take you to the macula.
Or if you are able to adequately dilate the eye, then it's to the lateral to the disc.
So macular edema is this is the edema.
And this is those hard exirates that I was talking about that we didn't see in the earlier ones.
But this is focal diabetic maculopathy with certainate exirate, and then this is the macular star.
So this is hard exirates in creating a star.
Management is clearly lysemic control, blood pressure control, also lipid control.
Specific treatment is laser photocoagulation for high risk proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
It is macular edema with severe non proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
Other specific treatments include petrectomy and cataract extraction.
And the real last bit of all of my lectures includes focuses on briefly on diabetic neuropathy.
And these are the effects of diabetic neuropathy.
So neuropathy is in diabetes, maybe hypoglycemic neuropathy, symmetrical polyneuropathy, and focal and multi focal neuropathy.
Hypoglycemic neuropathy is essentially reversible reduction in nerve conduction and transient sensory symptoms.
Symmetrical polyneuropathy may be acute, and that's a painful neuropathy.
Often they talk about burning food, especially at night.
And COVID may be chronic polyneuropathy, which is symmetrical, either sensory, sensory motor or autonomic.
Or it may be focal and multi-focal neuropities, like intrapment neuropities.
It's a carpal tunnel syndrome.
--- page 19 ---
Cleaning nerve poses like a third nerve pose, proximal motor neuropathy.
That's diabetic amiotropy and thoracometal neuropathy.
Now more details of this will be given to you by neurology.
So my function is just to actually give you an overview.
Now, for the symptoms for peripheral neuropathy, they may complain of parastasia, pain or sensory loss, or like I said, burning food is the pain.
Autonomic, there's a wide variety, gastratic, hyperhidrosis and anidrosis, nocturnal diarrhea, erectile dysfunction in a man, postural hypotension, GI bloating.
And that's diabetic gastroparesis or hypoglycemia, unawareness, cardiac effects, vascular, as well as bladder problems.
Examination for the peripheral neuropathy is examining touch with the monofilament and reflexes.
And to note that the first sensation to be involved is the vibration sense.
And the dynamic neuropathy, testing for postural hypotension, and also fixed tachycardia.
And the simple test for neuropathy includes biothesiometer or cardiovascular reflex response.
And the special tests include nerve conduction and nerve biopsy and other tests, for example, for autonomic neuropathy.
There are cardiovascular, vascular autonomic tests that can be done, including heart rate variation during deep breathing, heart rate increase on standing, or change during valsava, and a postural fall in the systolic blood pressure.
So the management of diabetic neuropathy, obviously is glycemic control.
But for the specific neuropathy, if there's painful neuropathy, the fact that you see so many classes of agents means that no therapy has actually been identified that is a panacea and also relates to the fact that
the pathophysiology is not as clearly identified for neuropathy as it is for neuropathy and retinopathy.
But nonetheless, for painful neuropathy, tricyclic antidepressants like emitriptyline and emipramine, anti-conversants like gabapentin, carbamazepine, and regabulin.
Dualoxetine, which is a 5-hydroxytryptamine and no adrenaline, no epinephrine, uptake inhibitor, and capsaicin clean, which is a substance P inhibitor.
For the autonomic symptoms, like in particular, for gastroparesis, use dietary changes in prokinetics like metochloramide or retromomycin, erectile dysfunction.
All of you know about that phosphodiester is type I of inhibitor or viagra, or but can use prostaglandins, or intra, which may be intra-corporeal or urethral, and then vacuum devices and phenylprosthesis.
--- page 20 ---
For gastatriyperhydrosis, the use of lipopyrrolate or lumenar.
So, the means of detecting the complications, like I said, is symptoms, clinical examination, specific investigations.
Now, at all levels, this is how you should be.
So, at each, you should be seeing the patient at least three months.
So, at each visit, the symptoms, the measure the weight and waste, blood BMI, blood pressure, that's the body mass index, blood pressure urine lipstick or protein, and then the self monitoring for blood glucose.
Each way, one see where possible three-monthly and when difficulty every six months, and the annual review for the chronic complications annually.
And then, if there is a problem, then you can do it more frequently.
So, I hope I've given you some idea about the endocrinological aspects that you need to understand.
And the start for the diabetes with Dr. Pili to continue, but also to note that while you may not understand everything now, it will come together as your years go by.
And it is the consolidation in fourth, fifth and sixth year that will make you understand all of these problems.
And on that note, I will stop.
And I thank you for your attention.
