--- page 1 ---
Good day, fourth year's. My name is Professor Aisha Motala, and I will be running the first
part of the Indocrine lectures, which consists of five parts for disorders of the pituitary
grant, parathyroid, adrenal gland, as well as two natures on diabetes, and the latter
half of the Indocrine lectures will be performed by Dr. Perry. So I'm going to move straight
on to the first lecture, and that is on disorders of the pituitary grant. Okay, just to point
out that the pituitary gland is a small gland at the base of the brain that comprises two
parts, a posterior, and let me just get my laser pointer, a posterior and an anterior, and it is a
gland that weighs about 0.4 to 0.8 grams, but has the highest blood flow of any organ in the body.
What you need to understand is the presentation of pituitary disorders and the broad investigations.
The presentation may be hyper secretion of hormones, visual disorders, enlargement of the
cellar tersica, and this leads to problems with space occupying lesions, and finally hyper
pituitrism. And the broad lines of investigation include radiology, endocrine and biochemical,
and neuro-optolmological, or the visual fields. Now, the anterior pituitary produces several
hormones and the diseases that develop either from hyper secretion or hyper secretion. So if
it's growth hormone excess, it causes acromegalyan adults, or gigantism in children, prolactin,
prolactinoma, gonadotropins, that's the luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone as
a gonadotropinoma. When thyroid tropin, or TSH, is secreted excessively, causes secondary
thyroid toxicosis, and in the case of acetate, hyper secretion, or cortical tropin, cushions
disease. Hypo secretion is referred to as hyper pituitrism, which may be isolated, that's only one hormone
--- page 2 ---
involved, or pen, that's more than one hormone. The posterior pituitary produces vasopressin,
or arginine vasopressin, or antidiuretic hormone. The excess secretion of which results in syndrome
of inappropriate ADH, OSEAD, and under or no secretion, results in cranial diabetes in Cipidus,
recently renamed as arginine vasopressin deficiency. Oxytocin is the other hormone,
but this is the domain of the obstetricians, and I'm not going to delve into it.
So the first disease state I'm going to discuss is acromegaly or gigantism. Gigantism is referred
to if excess growth hormone develops before fusion of the purposes and acromegaly after,
and it results from excessive growth hormone secretion, and at the time of diagnosis,
in 75% of individuals, these tumors are macro adenomas, in other words, more than 10 millimeters.
It's as common in women as in men, and generally presents in middle age.
This is a picture of an individual acromegaly prior to developing acromegaly, and after 10 years
of having acromegaly, and as you can see, it is said that acromegalyics look more like each other
than they do like their families. The clinical features, like many endocrine disorders,
are protean, in other words, multi-system disorders, and involve all the
organs that are shown on this slide. And in terms of the head and face, it's characterized
by coarse features, prominent supraorbital ridges because of enlarged frontal sinuses,
which may cause frontal buzzing, prognethism that's the forward protrusion of the lower jaw,
with the reversal of the bite and separation of the teeth, thickened lips and nose, and
macroglossia. In the upper limbs, they are stayed like enlargement of the hands, and I'm going to
--- page 3 ---
show you these pictures, resulting in compression of nerves and parastasia, excessive sweating,
proximal myopathies. It's one of the endocrine causes of proximal weakness,
carbultannal syndrome, and osteoarthritis. In the lower limbs, large feet, proximal
myopathy, osteoarthritis, and tassel tunnel syndrome. The eyes are prominently involved,
and this includes bi-temporal hemionopia because of pressure on the optic nerve,
optic atrophy because of pressure on the... I mean, sorry, the bi-temporal hemionopia is because
of pressure on the optic chiasm, optic atrophy because of pressure on the optic nerve,
and papilladema because of space occupying lesion and headache. Organomagilio,
versinomegaly may develop because IGF-1, which is the growth hormone product that
stimulates growth in all the organs, may result in cardiomegaly enlargement of the goiter,
enlargement of the thyroid with the goiter, splenomegaly, enlarged liver and kidneys,
and also laryngeal hypertrophy. And it is also, of course, a secondary hypertension
and glucose intolerance. In a third, hypertension develops in 20 to 40 percent glucose intolerance.
There is pre-diabetes, and in 13 to 20 percent diabetes.
The general system may be involved with amenorrhea and infertility,
impotence, decreased libido, and because of co-secretion of prolactin, in many instances,
gynecomastia and or galacturine may develop. The skeletal effects include osteoporosis,
kyphosis, and spinal stenosis. Hypertrophy of the sweat glands may occur because of increased
growth hormone, and this causes excessive sweating, and because of the enlarged thyroid and excessive
--- page 4 ---
sweating, a misdiagnosis of thyroid toxicosis may be made. The skin and the subcut tissue
here is characterized by oily skin, herseutism and acanthosis, nigricans, hypertricosis, and skin
tags. And the importance of the skin tags is that if they are more than three skin tags, there's
an association either with colonic polyps or carcinoma, the colon. And the other thing that
happens because of increase in subcutaneous tissue is an increase in heel path thickness,
which I'll refer to later. Because of the laryngeal hypertrophy, obstructive sleep apnea may develop,
and this may cause somnolence, and constitutional symptoms may also develop including fatigue,
excessive sweating and heat intolerance, and increase in weight. The cardiovascular system
is prominently involved, resulting from the hypertension, or cardiomegaly from either
left ventricular failure, or left ventricular hypertrophy. And cardiac failure may also be due
to cardiomyopathy, and I've spoken about the thyroid. And although it's usually in the case of
a euthyroid goiter in a small proportion, they may have hyperthyroidism. Now, what is the importance
of picking up acromegaly? Because untreated, it is associated with a shortened lifespan,
and death may result from cardiovascular disease, cerebral vascular disease, or respiratory disease,
or in fact, if there's an associated malignancy, carcinoma, the colon. Now, how does one go about
investigating acromegaly? Clearly, it's the clinical features. So, it's important to get
a previous photograph, the visual fields by formal prometry showing biotemporal hemionopia,
and then the radiological examination, which is either plain x-rays of the skull, the hands,
the feet, and the chest x-ray, as well as, most importantly, direct MRI of the pituitrin,
--- page 5 ---
where that's not available CT scan. The plain x-rays of the skull will show an enlarged
pituitary fossa with the erosion of the clinoid processes and enlarged frontal sinuses,
prognethism, and also separation of the teeth. In the hands, there's a characteristic
tufting of the terminal phalanges, widening of the joint space, osteoarthritis, and increase
in what is referred to as the cesamoid index. In the feet, there's increased eupad thickness.
There's a certain thickness for men and women, and if it exceeds that, then it is called
increased eupad thickness, and the radiologist will report on that. Then there's widening of
the joint spaces, as well as osteoarthritis. The plain x-ray of the vertebrae will show
enlarged vertebral bodies. The MRI of the pituitrin is important because one wants to determine
whether the tumor is only intracellular, what is the size? In other words, is it a micro adenoma,
and if there's any supercellular extension, because that will determine the mode of
intervention. The other important ancillary investigation to do is the bone mineral density,
because osteopenia may develop. The biochemical or endocrine investigation
is done for two reasons. To establish growth hormone hypersecretion, and to determine whether
there's adequate pituitary reserve of the rest of the pituitary gland.
For the biochemical tests, the basal tests that are done include the serum growth hormone,
an IGF-1, which is elevated, a prolactin, which may be in a co-secreting tumor, elevated,
increased serum phosphate, hyperglycemia, or dysglycemia, and increased serum calcium.
The gold standard provocative test that is done to establish growth hormone hypersecretion
--- page 6 ---
is an oral glucose tolerance test, because normally, when one does an oral glucose tolerance test,
the glucose rises by one hour and falls to basal at two hours, and the growth hormone,
which has a certain basal level, will fall as the glucose increases at one hour and return to baseline
at two hours. But in acromegaly, the baseline level is high, and it fails to increase or decrease
with the changes in the glucose levels. Other tests that can be done, which are not needed,
include a TRH test, insulin tolerance test, L-dopa test, and the GNRH test. Now, what about
tests for the pituitary reserve? For this, you want ones to establish whether the rest
of the anterior pituitary and posterior pituitary is preserved. And for the anterior pituitary,
one undertakes an insulin tolerance test to induce hyperglycemia. This is for assessing
the response of cortisol, a TRH test for the response of TSH to TRH. The GNRH were available
for LH and FSH. And if you can't do the incident tolerance test, which is the goal standard,
then what one can do is a synactin, that's a one microgram IV synactin test,
or a glucagon test. And this is for the cortisol, as well as growth hormone.
For the posterior pituitary, in other words, you want to establish whether this cranial diabetes
insipidus or arginine vasopressin deficiency. It's a basal test and then provocative test.
Basal test one does is a serum and urine osmolality. And the provocative test is a water deprivation
test. With respect to management, the objectives of management is to reduce growth hormone and IGF1
levels that's insulin-like growth factor one levels to normal, to decrease the size of the tumor
and to preserve the rest of the pituitary function, both anterior and posterior.
--- page 7 ---
Now, in most endocrine conditions, other than prolactinoma and pterotoxicosis,
surgery is the first line of therapy and the treatment of choice in acromegaly.
Radiotherapy is another option. And very last is the medical therapy.
Now, the surgery that is undertaken is usually transphenoidal pituitary resection or adenoma
resection. And this is usually done via the nose and to enter the pituitary fossa from below.
And either targeted or total pituitary resection. And this is usually
if there's no supracella extension. If there's significant supracella extension,
then one does a transcranial, in other words, you'll get a scar on the front of the scalp.
Radiotherapy is indicated if the patient refuses surgery or is a poor risk for surgery or if this
failure would surgery. And the irradiation includes external irradiation and stereotactic
radiotherapy. As I said, medical therapy is a last option for acromegaly. And one can use either
dopamine agonists like bromachryptine or cambagoline. And this is particularly helpful if you have
both the growth hormone and prolactin increased. And generally one uses medical therapy if
surgical therapy is refused or fails to complement radiotherapy. Or sometimes in very rare instances
where there's mild growth hormone hyper secretion and the patient is old or otherwise well. And
or to tide the patient over before surgery. And the dose that's given is 2.5 milligrams
three times a day up to 60 milligrams a day. And then the somatostatin analogs like octreotide
or perseveotide and growth hormone receptor agonists, which is not available in this country.
Sorry, growth hormone receptor antagonist. And this is pig, pig visa month. And this
--- page 8 ---
works against the growth hormone receptor. So what about the follow up of these patients? All patients
was acromegaly require long term follow up and evaluation for recurrence. And the cure rate is
80% if there's a micro adenoma, which is hardly the instance. And 50% if there's a macro adenoma,
in other words, more than one centimeter in diameter or 10 millimeters. I'm going to show you some
pictures of a patient who's provided consent. This is, I know what happened to my laser.
So this is a patient with acromegaly and you can see the course features or the large nose
and large lips and prognathism with reversal of the bite, a large spade like hands. And
this is so bad that you can actually see the increased heel path thickness clinically.
Again, the reversal of the bite and separation of the teeth, spade like hands. This is a plain
X-ray showing frontal, in large one of the frontal sinuses, in large one of the pituitary fossa
or the erosion of the climate processes. And this is the MRI of the pituitary showing a macro adenoma.
So that's acromegaly. To move now to prolactinomas,
prolactinomas are in fact the most common functioning pituitary tumor. And by virtue of his name
means that it secretes prolactin. And in, it may be a micro adenoma or a macro adenoma.
In females, it's usually a micro adenoma. And that 70% of all micro adenomas occur in women,
while macro adenomas, in other words more than 10 millimeters, tend to be more commonly seen
in men. In other words, 60% of all macro adenomas that are prolactinomas are in men.
And the clinical features are defined by or are characterized by, it's related either to the
tumor size. In other words, the mass lesion with headache, cleaning of palsies or visual field defects.
--- page 9 ---
But an important indicator, both in men and women is galacturia, which occurs in about 80%
of all people who have hyperprolectinemia. And the other features are related to the excessive
prolactin secretion, including the galacturia. So in men and women, you make it galacturia.
And in women, you get amenorrhea, infertility, as well as acne and recutism. In men,
galacturia, they may have gynecomastia. Again, they will have decreased libido and
impotence. And in both men and women, you also get osteoporosis.
So the investigations are obviously radiological and biochemical, radiological, the same as for
acromegaly, where either plain x-ray and in particular an MRI of the pituitary. And then the
biochemical, the important point to understand is that prolactinoma is unlike other endocrine
conditions in which you do not require provocative tests. And that it is the basal serum prolactin
that crinches the diagnosis of prolactinoma as the cause of hyperprolectinemia. In other words,
if the basal serum prolactin is more than four times the upper limit of normal for that particular
laboratory, then that indicates that the hyperprolectinemia is coming from a prolactinoma,
rather than other many causes of secondary hyperprolectinemia.
So you don't really need any provocative tests. Again, these are just radiological
pictures. You can't really see this, but there's enlargement of the pituitary fossa.
This can be seen clearly on the MRI. And on this section, you can see that the supracela
extension, that supracela, this would be intracellular.
The management of prolactinoma, unlike other endocrine conditions, as I've said earlier,
--- page 10 ---
is medical. The medical treatment of choice is any dopamine agonist,
either bromachiptine or the analogs, like cabbagoline or quinagilide. And surgical,
they respond very poorly to surgery. And surgery is indicated if there's a microedadonoma,
in which instance, in most instances, they won't even present. And to subject a patient
to surgical therapy, where medical therapy can result in involution of the tumor,
may not be considered the wisest choice. It is used for
maybe used for where the sudden deterioration of vision with a macroedanoma. So while the
microedanomas, for which there really is no reason to undertake surgery, respond well,
it is said that macroedanomas actually respond poorly to surgical intervention and may only be
required where there's rapid features of confession. In other words, the visual
sudden and massive deterioration in the vision.
The next aspect of pituitary disease is hypo pituitism. And there are many. So just again,
to just reiterate, isolated hypo pituitism is where there's only one hormone that's involved
and pan-hypo pituit in one hormone, like either ACTH or gonadotrofen or TSA to growth hormone
deficiency. And pan-hypo pituitism, technically, if there's more than one hormone, but usually
involves several of the pituitary hormones. The causes, again, a variety of 