--- page 1 ---
parathyrid. This order is including the general considerations in hyper parathyridism and
a hypo parathyridism. And perhaps for you to understand that there are three hormones and
three organs that play a vital role. The hormones are parathyrid hormones referred to henceforth
as PTH, vitamin D and calcitonin and the three main organs are the bone, the gut and kidneys.
The parathyrid glands, and there's a point again, the parathyrid therefore parathyrid glands
two superior and two inferior arising from the fourth and the third pharyngeal pouches
respectively and they parathyrid because they're embedded within the thyroid. For calcium
homeostasis, what's for you important to remember is that PTH ultimately acts mainly on the bone
and the kidney and the end result is an increase in calcium and a low phosphate. The vitamin D acts
on the bone and the GI tract and the end result is an increase in both calcium and phosphate
while calcitonin which acts on the bone and the kidney, the net result physiologically
is a low calcium and a low phosphate. The other important issue is that calcium may be
diffusible or non-diffusible but it is the free or ionized calcium which is important
for the metabolic effects of hypokalsemia and one always measures the corrected serum calcium
because of binding of calcium to albumin so you make it an erroneous result.
The example, for example, if the, you take 40 as the normal total serum albumin in any individual
subtract the patient's serum albumin multiplied by 0.02 plus the uncorrected serum calcium that
you would have received from the lab and if the patient serum calcium is 1.8 and the albumin is
20 then 20 times 0.02 plus 1.8 is 2.2 millimoles per liter which will be the corrected calcium.
This is pictorially or graphically showing what I've already explained to you how PTH acts on the
PTH which is released from the paratharid gland acts on the kidney and the bone vitamins, it stimulates
the function of active vitamin D and the gut causing an increase in blood calcium and
the maintenance of blood calcium which, if it falls, will stimulate the paratharid gland to
--- page 2 ---
produce PTH. So the types of hyperparatharidism that exist include primary, secondary, tertiary,
and ectopic. Primary hyperparatharidism is where you have increased calcium and PTH.
Secondary is so with respect to primary this may be due to an adenoma some involvement of the
paratharid gland adenoma or multiple endocrine neoplasia 1.02 A or it may be due to hyperplasia
or it may very rarely be due to carcinoma. So that's primary. So the initiating event is a high
PTH resulting in a high calcium. Secondary is a compensatory increase in PTH that develops
in conditions which are associated with a low calcium and this includes chronic renal disease,
malabsorption and rickets and osteomyelacia. It is probably the commonest type of hyperparatharidism
secondary hyperparatharidism but the important point is that the PTH is elevated but the serum
calcium is never higher than normal and if that happens then it is called tertiary hyperparatharidism
where after persistent and longstanding low calcium stimulating secondary hyperparatharidism
the gland under autonomously undergoes hyperplasia and then it in essence acts like
primary hyperparatharidism. Ectopic PTH secretion here you have Azodoka for example was a squamous
carcinoma of the lung not a small cell carcinoma or hyphenophromas or lymphomas or bresies and in
this instance the high calcium is due to a PTH related protein which is not measurable
on laboratory investigation. So here you get a high calcium with a PTH that's either low or absent.
So primary hyperparatharidism is due to autonomous or and excessive secretion of PTH by the
paratharid gland and is characterized by the presence or the clinical features of renal
calculi hypercalcemia and metabolic bone disease and as I've said the causes are in the most
instance adenomas either solitary or multiple multiple endocrine neoplasia hyperplasia or very
rarely carcinoma and all of this autonomous secretion of PTH that causes a high calcium
that affects all the organs results in the condition that is referred to as bones,
stones, abdominal groans and psychic bones and with respect to the clinical features these may be
--- page 3 ---
the effects on the kidney that's the renal effects the bones or just the effect of hypercalcemia.
So in the kidneys the commonest which is the commonest presentation of hyperparatharidism
they may present with calculus or nephrocalcinosis or just the effects of hypertension and also
as a cause of secondary hypertension. So these are all the renal effects and the
calculator may cause renal colic or pneumaturia and infections like pylunophritis.
Netrocalcinosis is a tubular dysfunction so you get polyurea and polydipsia that's nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus or arginine vasopressin resistance. The hypercalcemia in the kidneys may cause
inability to concentrate urine that's nephrogenic diabetes insipidus it may cause inability to
solidify the urine that's renal tubular acidosis or it may just cause gross tubular damage
that's Fanconi's syndrome or proximal tubular damage resulting in glycolzuria,
phosphaturia and amine vasoduria. The bones is the second most common presentation
of hyperparatharidism but usually it's more it means that the hypercalcemia has been present
for a long time and it occurs at a level serum calcium usually that is higher than that at
which renal storms occur. Now what happens in the bones and I'll show you pictures you get
increased reabsorption of calcium from the bone which causes a rare reflection of the skeleton
and these result in cyst formation called osteitis fibrosocistica which
classically occur in the mandible, the humerus, the femur and the clavicle and because of these
cysts they lead to thinning of the bone marrow and the bone bone marrow becomes replaced by
osteoclastic giant cell tumors referred to as brown tumors and these then thirdly lead to
pathological fractures and you may also get superior osteo-reabsorption of the phalanges
and it's usually the radial aspect of the right middle finger. Now in addition to the
increased reabsorption of calcium and rare reflection and osteitis fibrosocistica,
hypercalcemia may also cause backache, bowing off a long of the long bone especially if it's
--- page 4 ---
developing in adolescence, kyphosis and sero clubbing. Then lastly the effects of hypocalcemia.
This again is a multi-system on the GI tract because anorexia, nausea, weight loss and weakness,
dyspepsia related to a peptic ulcer or unrelated to a peptic ulcer, abdominal,
colic and typically what is referred to as obstipation, that's obstinate constipation
and hypercalcemia may also cause acute or chronic pancreatitis. Now the relationship between calcium
and pancreas is important because we know that acute pancreatitis say from alcohol will cause
a low calcium whereas hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia may itself cause pancreatitis.
So there's a relationship both ways between the pancreas and calcium. In the kidneys,
I've mentioned you get polyuria, polydipsia and dehydration. Mental changes, these are very
important like anxiety, irritability and depression which may be one of the first things that recover
after a successful removal of the cow population. Proximaopathy may also occur and then metastatic
calcification. In the skin, calcium deposits, in the joints, it's a cause of pseudogout or
chondrocalcinosis and in the eyes, you get corneal deposits called acroslimbus which is on the
median and lateral aspects of the cornea or it may also deposit in the sclera or the conjunctiva.
The other problem with hypercalcemia is acute hypercalcemia which is a medical emergency. This is where
the serum calcium depending on the books that you read is either equal to a greater than 3.5
or 3.7 millimoles per liter and yeah this is typically seen not so much with primary hyperparathyroidism
but often seen with hematological disorders like myeloma but in essence can occur with
pancreatic parathyroidism where the patient goes into a shock like state with oliguria,
dehydration, pyrexia, coma and ultimately if unrecognized they may die.
The investigations include a serum total calcium, corrected calcium that's elevated
with a low serum phosphate, increased urinary calcium and urinary phosphate. The serum PTH
is elevated regarding the alkaline phosphatase if the bone is involved this may be increased.
--- page 5 ---
The megaheipa urosemia and in the urea and electrolytes on refined hypochloramic
alkaloacidosis in other words a high bicarb and a low, I mean a high chloride and a low bicarb
and the calcium excretion on a spot urine sample is increased here certain cup points.
The x-rays, the plain x-rays of the hands, the skull, the long bones and the spine and I'm going
to show you pictures. I important the hands will show the tufting of the terminal phalanges
and subperiaustial reabsorption of the mineral phalanx of the metal finger and in the skull you
get a granular mottled or a pepper pot appearance or also referred to as a salted pepper appearance.
In the long bones, cysts may be found due to osteitis fibrosis cystica and in the vertebrae
one may encounter sclerosis of the superior and inferior margins of the vertebrae.
Bone-modal density, it is important when you're screening by paparoparidism that you don't only do
the spine and the hips but also do the distal third of the radius and this is because the
hyperperiparidism affects cortical bone more than it does a cancerless bone like the spine.
So the distal third of the radius is cortical bone and the BMD is decreased
and very importantly at the distal third of the radius even if it's not involved
in the spine and the all that this is unusual. The examination of the parathyroid gland itself
by ultrasound CT scan or MRI and very importantly is a radionuclear test called the sestamivis scan
and this is important for localizing adenomas. In the ECG you get the shortening of the corrected
QT interval and the normal QT interval is between 0.35 and 0.4 milliseconds and the corrected QT
interval is the QT interval divided by the square root of the RR interval. So now these slides
show the radiological features of subperiosteal reabsorption then the cysts in the flat bones,
the salt and pepper appearance of the scalp, the system more clearly shown on this this is osteitis
fibrosis cystica and this is the sestamivis scan which is a radionuclide scan this is the
thyroid these are the parathyroid and what you can see here is the right lower parathyroid
--- page 6 ---
picking up the tracer and suggesting an adenoma. So the management of parathyroidism
depends obviously on the course if it's primary parathyroidism the treatment surgical treatment
is the treatment of choice and importantly also to do intraoperative PTH levels we measure the
PTH before and after resection of the calculate lesion and there's a dramatic reduction in the
PTH levels also indicating surgical success. So surgery is by far the most important form
of treatment medical therapy may be employed with the patient refuses surgery or is not a
candidate for surgery. So surgery is for everything an adenoma a resectable malignancy or hyperplasia
the difference is an adenoma you just take out the adenoma if it's hyperplasia you remove three
and a half glands and you can transplant the remaining half gland into the forearm so the
patient develops further hyperparathyroidism it's easier to take it out from the forearm.
If it's a malignancy if it's a single malignancy then surgery if it's multiple then you have to
use other medical therapy then medical therapy is a calcium in medic agents like sine a calcid
which acts on the which targets the calcium sensing receptor on the parathyroid cells
so they read it as they being enough calcium and the calcium is not so PTH is not secreted.
If it's a tertiary then the management is the same as for primary and if it's secondary
where it's due to malabsorption obviously vitamin D and if it's due to chronic renal disease either
vitamin D or alpha colic acid for all and for acute hypercalciumia the management is
rehydration with normal saline by phosphonates in particular asylendronate or in the face of
impairment I bandronate. If it's maloma then you'll use steroids and false diuresis or
paracostome and but not for primary hyperparathyroidism. This is a picture depicting all the things
that I've spoken about earlier all the effects of hyperparathyroidism.
Now to move to hypercalciumia now hypercalciumia and hyperparathyroidism it is important broadly
firstly to define that hypercalciumia may be because of PTH absent that's what hyperparathyroidism
--- page 7 ---
which is what we are going to talk about. PTH in effector which may be due to multiple causes
like a pseudo hyperparathyroidism chronic renal failure and vitamin D or PTH overwhelmed which
may occur in the angry bone syndrome where you have after parathyroid dictum in a patient who had
many or multiple osteitis fibrosis cystica the the calcium gets reabsorbed into the bone
or where you have acute hyperphosphatemia like intumolysis acute renal failure or end myelosis.
PTH absent or hyperparathyroidism I'm going to discuss that that is what we're going to discuss
this is obviously where there's inadequate PTH secretion either because of inadequate secretion
or resistance to PTH. The causes of hyperparathyroidism may be hereditary acquired or hypermagnetismia.
Hereditary includes idiopathic and also a condition referred to as polyglandular autoimmune syndrome
or it may be a development like the georgia syndrome. Acquired the commonest cause is surgical
and then radiation for some other condition and also infiltration like tuberculosis, amyloid doses,
sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis and hypermagnetismia may also cause hyperparathyroidism because there's
a intricate relationship between magnesium and the PTH. Now like any other endocrine condition
it's a multi-system clinical manifestations and these include neuromuscular irritability
or tetany or latent tetany then all the others that I show on this slide but let's start with
neuromuscular irritability or tetany. This is latent tetany is characterized by
parastasia. Let's spin the needles. A cup of fetal spasm for the positive trussosine
and this is where you lift up the blood pressure to above systolic for about three minutes and then
the patient goes into a cup of spasm. Pedal may occur but it's more common to get
cup of spasm and that's referred to as trussosine. A positive sharpstacks where the CHVOSTEK
where one taps the facial nerve over the perotid and this induces contraction of the
facial nerve but the important to understand there are about 5% of the normal population will
also have a positive sharpstacks. Brisk reflexes, convulsions and if not treated they may get
--- page 8 ---
laryngeal spasms and respiratory arrest. So that's the effect of neuromuscular irritability.
Mental changes like irritability, depression and psychosis eyes may be involved with cataracts
and it's one of the endocrine conditions that causes benign intracranial hypertension which
is typified by bilateral papilladema. Other neurological abnormalities like epilepsy
so in addition to benign intracranial hypertension epilepsy calcification of the basal ganglia
which causes what is referred to as fast syndrome F-A-H-R
which is carried by extra-parameter symptoms and signs.
The skin and subcutaneous tissue and the nails and teeth may be involved
and here the skin is dry and scaly. There's eczema, alopecia, brittle and deformed nails
which are prone to paranecia or candida infections of the nails and the teeth if they
develop it very early in life are reached and malformed. The GI tract, anorexia, abdominal
distension, constipation or malabsorption and the cardiovascular system arrhythmias,
diminished efficacy of drugs like dejoxone and in contrast to hyperparathyroidism the what one gets
is a prolonged corrected cutie interval.
The investigations here the reverse occurs the serum calcium and total serum
corrected calcium is low phosphate is high both the urine calcium and phosphate will be decreased.
The PTH will be very low or absent the magnesium may be low but the alkaline phosphatase is normal.
The urine electrolytes may show a metabolic alkalosis. ECG will be a prolongation of the
corrected cutie interval and the CT scan or x-ray of the scalp you look for calcification
of the basal ganglia. The management will depend on whether it's transient
or chronic and if it's transient then just treat with oral calcium, calcium
ideally calcium carbonate and if it's severe intravenous calcium gluconeate. If it's chronic
then vitamin D analogs like one alpha or alpha-calcidiol
--- page 9 ---
and also rho-calcetrol which is 125 dihydroxylcholicasiparol
and more recently the use of teri-paratide or PTH but we don't have it available for routine
use and also important to check the magnesium because of the relationship I spoke to between
magnesium and PTH and this magnesium if it's mild you can give it orally as a slow mag
one tablet twice a day or if it's severe as an intravenous infusion. The prognosis is if it's
post-op due to edema in other words if it's transient then the prognosis is good. If it's
detected early whatever the cause then it is good but if it's not detected early then the prognosis
is worse and I'm just going to say a few words about a pseudo-highfold parathyroidism
because it's a clinically exciting condition but just to point out that
pseudo-highfold parathyroidism which they are at least you know at the minimum
about three types is characterized by parathyroid glands that are normal or hypoplastic
but where you have an apparent failure of the target organs in other words the kidneys and
bones to respond to PTH and it is a hereditary disorder characterized by signs and symptoms
of hypoperathyroidism but distinctive phenotypic skeletal and developmental defects
and the hypoperathyroidism is due as I said to deficient end organ response to PTH
and so you get hyperplasia of the PTH gland which is response to this PTH resistance and causes
raised PTH it is a genetic condition and it's due to abnormality of what is referred to as the
G protein in other words the alpha subunit of the G protein so there's a G alpha subunit deficiency
the clinical features the classical one most of them show what is referred to as all brides
heraldry osteodistopy which consists of short stature skeletal abnormalities and a round face
with frontal buzzing and the skeletal abnormalities include short metacarpals the first the fourth
and the fourth in particular the fourth metacarpal and occasionally you get short phalanges they
get short stubby hands they get heterotropic calcification in the basal ganglia as well
--- page 10 ---
and ectopic deposits of bone in the muscles and the skin some of them have mental deficiency
and well actually most of them have some mental deficiency and they may have epilepsy and
tetany and then they have all the other features of hyperparathyroidism that I that I spoke about
and this is a picture of a child with the pseudo hyperparathyroidism I'll show it to you
more clearly on another picture but a short fourth metacarpal
and the investigations that one does is the usual parathyroidism but the difference is that while
you get a low calcium and a high phosphate the PTH is increased and the alkaline phosphatase
may be normal or increased and there is a test called the alzewa coward test which in which
one measures a euronsactic AMP and phosphate to decide whether this is hyperparathyroidism
pseudo hyperparathyroidism and the varying forms of pseudo hyperparathyroidism so again more pictures
you can see this around phase this basal ganglia calcification you can see it here on the plane
x-ray and this is one of our patients and the way you look for a short fourth metacarpal
is that you ask the person to make a fist and normally all the metacarpal heads are
at the same level but you can see here that the fourth metacarpal is pushed down so you can see
these other metacarpals but not the fourth metacarpal and this is another picture of the basal ganglia
calcification so that's the end of the perathyroid i'm going to
