--- page 1 ---
Hello, I'm Dr. Matella from the Department of Geriatrics. Welcome to your lecture on
frailty. Looking at the physiological changes that happen from bed until the
age around age of 35. So all the body systems and the body organs, they are
developing at this stage and until they reach that peak at the age of 35. So for
instance, if you're exercising, you're going to have a higher peak of the muscle
strength than someone who's not exercising. If you're not smoking, you're
going to have a higher peak of the lung function than someone who's smoking. Then
there will be patients who have a higher cardiac reserve. It all depends on what
the peak was. And depending on that peak, that decline that happens from the age of
35. There will be a decline regardless of who you are. That decline is dependent on
--- page 2 ---
what your peak was. If you had a low peak, that decline is going to be very
significant. And if you had a high peak, you'll still have a decline, but it's not
going to be as much as someone who had a low peak. Then there's that physiological
reserve line where you still decline, but you are still able to function, you're
still able to walk, you're still able to breathe properly. But when that decline
then passes that functional reserve, that's when patients are deemed to have
frailty, that's when patients have high risk of being disabled.
Frailty is defined as the loss of a patient's ability to extend minor
environmental stresses because of reduced reserve in the physiological
function of several organ systems. So in this diagram here, you have an
--- page 3 ---
individual who's robust as an individual who does not have frailty. When they're
exposed to the stressor, a stressor can be an infection, it can be a fall, it can be
trauma, it can be surgery. When they are exposed to a stressor, there will be
have a deep in the physiological function, but with recovery they recover back to
their baseline, where a patient who has pre frailty when they're exposed to the
same stressor, they will dip in the physiological function when they recover,
they don't go back to their baseline. A patient who is frail, they hardly recover
back to their baseline, they end up being dependent. These are the patients
after admission or on discharge, they cannot go back home because they are not
dependent, they end up in old age home. Sakopinium, which is defined as
--- page 4 ---
reduced muscle strength, is a key feature of frailty and frailty is
associated with poor health outcome. There are multiple tools that are used to
assess frailty, we will just discuss the commonly used ones. So there's a
cardiovascular health study, which is also called frailty phenotype, it looks
at five things, unintentional weight loss, which is more than 5% in the previous
year, there is weakness, which is measured by a hand grip strength, there is
self-reported exhaustion or poor endurance, there is slowness where you ask a
patient to walk for three meters and you are timing them and the gates, you time
the time they take to walk over three meters, then there's low physical
activity which is self-reported and patients who meet three out of the five
--- page 5 ---
criteria are regarded as frail, pre frailty is the presence of one to two of
these five criteria. Another assessment tool that has been used is osteoporotic
fracture frailty index, where it looks at the weight loss of more than 5% over
the two period, this is irrespective of the intent to lose weight, inability to
rise five times from a chair without using your arms and reduce energy
levels, you ask the patient, do you feel full of energy and they say no. So if
they've got two out of these three, they are regarded as frail. The next
commonly used tool is frailty index or deficit accumulation, in this one you
would choose 30 health deficits, these can include symptoms, signs, diseases,
disabilities, abnormal blood results or imaging or ECGs, and then you would take
--- page 6 ---
the patient and count how many of those the patient will have, they'll
probably have maybe 20 out of the 30 or 15 out of the 30, then you will divide
that if they have 20 you divide that 20 by the 30 and you get a score, a score
of more or equal to 0.25, make them frail. A frailty scale you classify
patients according to what they can do, like one would be a very fit patient who
runs, they are the fittest of their age, like a five would be a mild defrailed
patient, these are people who are more evidently slowing, they need help with
doing their instrumental activities of daily living, like taking transport to
hospital, doing house chores, taking their own medication or managing their own
finances, and a terminally ill, which is a nine would be patients who are
--- page 7 ---
reaching their end of life or have a life expectancy of less than six months, so
frailty is either primary or secondary, but when you're looking at the pathophysiology
there is genetic factors, atrocities and chronic inflammation, which is believed
to be the factor behind frailty and with that there is low levels of exercise and
malnutrition and this can lead to primary frailty, but also there's another wing
where there is chronic inflammation, genetic factors, low level of exercise
that can lead to a clinical disease, that clinical disease then leads to
secondary frailty and those patients end up being disabled and then it becomes a
a psycho and with disability then they are slower, they have low physical
activity, which then leads them to that primary frailty, but patients who are
--- page 8 ---
also just primarily frail, they are in a higher risk of getting chronic diseases
and these chronic diseases we know can lead to secondary frailty, so it becomes a
psycho, but when you look at the pathophysiology there's also a room for
prevention where like low physical activity and malnutrition can be prevented
like exercise and a good diet can prevent frailty, can prevent some
clinical diseases, because once you get to a frailty stage then there will be a stage
where you cannot reverse frailty and that's when we talk about palliation, this
slide is more like a reputation of the pathophysiology of frailty, you have
genetics, there's lifestyle factors like smoking, alcohol, inactivity, malnutrition
then there are diseases like diabetes, atherosclerosis, cognitive impairment
--- page 9 ---
coupled with aging, those are the factors that will lead to frailty and with frailty
there is functional decline and disability and once you have that there's increased risk of
hospitalization of institutionalization and death and but patients who are frail
there is a room of rehabilitation, for instance you can't do anything about age
but you can't do anything about genetic factors but lifestyle modification, you
can do something about that, stopping smoking, alcohol being active, eating a
balanced diet, also diseases there's a room for modification, they're controlling
diabetes for instance, then there is also a room for rehabilitation in patients who
are already frail and they already have functional decline and those include exercise as well
the risk factors for frailty include age especially over the age of 80 years,
--- page 10 ---
female older patients, smoking, depression, chronic diseases and underweight
and consequences of frailty include falls, lots of ability to do activities of daily living,
disability, frail patients have higher risk of getting hospitalized when they get infection,
they have risk of infections, they have risk of getting malnutrition, they have higher risk of
getting cognitive impairment, they have increased risk of osteoporosis, osteostatic hypertension
and higher risk of dying, this is the end of the frailty lecture thank you
