--- page 1 ---
Hello, I'm Yolysomadella from the Department of Geriatrics. Today we'll be
talking about aiotrogenesis. We will start with this case scenario. You have an
86-year-old woman who is known with hypertension, diabetes, mellitus,
dyslipidemia, ischemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation, and osteoarthritis of
the knees. She is on hydrochlorothiazide, 12.5 milligrams daily for the
hypertension, and allopral 5 milligrams twice a day for the hypertension, made
forming 500 milligrams twice daily for diabetes, at over 13 10 milligrams at
night for the dyslipidemia. I also bite mono nitrate 10 milligrams twice a day
for the ischemic heart disease, paracetamol twice a day for the osteoarthritis,
declofanac, 25 milligrams three times a day for the osteoarthritis,
aspirin, 150 milligrams daily for the ischemic heart disease, and
atinolol 50 milligrams daily for the hypertension and ischemic heart disease.
At her follow-up visit, she complains of epicastropane and her blood pressures
are 110 cevangi over 110 millimeters of mercury, which is high. Her blood tests
show deterioration of her renal function. So I want you to look at this slide and
--- page 2 ---
think about what could be happening with this patient, and we will come back
to this case scenario at a later stage. Looking at the
respective for adverse drug events in older patients, you might be more
familiar with the terminology of side effects, so the risk increases with age,
especially those 85 years and above. Patients who have a low body mass index
or low body weight, patients who have six or more chronic conditions because
there will be on medication for those conditions. Patients who have an
estimated creatinine clearance of less than 50 mils per minute, so patients who
have got reduced renal function, patients who are on nine medications or more,
patients who have more than 12 doses of medication a day. This means one
medication you're taking it twice a day, some you're taking three times a day,
some you're taking four times a day, some you're taking once a day, so if you are
on 12 or more of those medications per day, patients who have a prior
adverse drug reaction. So what puts older patients at a risk of adverse drug
events is with age, you get physiological changes, which alter
--- page 3 ---
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics, we will talk about this in the next slide.
Patients who are older have tend to lose homeostasis, they tend to have multiple
comorbidities and they tend to have polypharmacy, which by definition is if
you are one for or more medication and they tend to have drug interactions and
there's also an issue with complying. So looking at the mechanism of drug
effects, when we talk about pharmacokinetics we're looking at what the
body does to the drug, so when you take a drug it gets absorbed, this does not
change with age, and then this drug gets distributed and it gets eliminated, the
elimination includes metabolism and extrusion, so the distribution and the
metabolism and extrusion, there are changes that happen with age. When it
comes to pharmacodynamics now we're looking at what the drug does to the
body, the next slide are going to explain how exactly the physiological changes
would affect these pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in older patients. So
pharmacodynamics with aging there is changes in the drug response, so there is
drug receptor and drug organ interactions that happen, there is increased
--- page 4 ---
sensitivity to certain drugs, like if you are on anticholinetics the older
patients tend to have side effects related to the urinary bladder and the
eyes and the brains, they are more sensitive to the anticholinetics and they
tend to have decreased sensitivity to certain drugs like beta blockers and
beta agonists, older patients tend to have a blended response, so those are the
pharmacodynamics changes that happen with age. When it comes to homeostated
changes with age there is physiological changes that happen in the bowel
receptors, there is loss of control of body sway, there are changes in the
thermal regulation, there are changes in the test and volume
regulation, and there are changes that happen in the electrolyte and glucose
regulation. So this means when you have changes in the bowel receptors, older
people then tend to be prone to having orthostatic hypotension, especially when
they are on certain drugs that will drop their blood pressure, they tend to be
atexic when you give them benzodiazepine, they tend to have hypodemia, if you give
them drugs like pheno thiazide and they tend to be volume depleted and they
--- page 5 ---
become dehydrated when you give them diuretics and they also tend to have
electrolyte abnormalities with glucose dysregulation when you give them
diuretics. There is also the effect of coexisting diseases because chronic
diseases increase with age, you get renal and cardiac failure which affect
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and the sensitivity of the drugs. You have
increased meningial permeability with age which increases the sensitivity to
opiates, to obituates, to pheno thiazide and benzodiazepine, which means older
patients tend to have higher risk of getting side effects or adverse drug
effects when you give them those drugs. Then they tend to have more side effects
when you give them anticholinergic drugs, so they tend to have worsening of benign
prosthetic hyperplasia in men and they tend to have dementia and they would have
worsening of the cloud. Polypharmacy is defined as being on
for or more medications and we know that drug to drug interaction increases once
someone is on for more medication, older patients also tend to have more pain
complaints and tend to take non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The problem with
--- page 6 ---
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is that the encounter at the efficacy of
all anti-hypertensives, so they will come with uncontrolled hypertension, it
counteracts with the efficacy of anti-ingential drugs and anti-cardiac
failure drugs. Then there is the poor compliance and when you look at the
reasons for poor compliance in older patients would be poor instructions, they
did not get how to take the drugs properly. There's complex regimens and
they're taking three times a day, four times a day of medication. There is also
adverse drug reactions. If people get adverse drug reactions then they would
tend to stop taking that drug. If it's an inconvenience to take that drug, for
instance, you prescribe a drug to take a two in the morning when they are still
sleeping or 12 at night when they are sleeping or when they are going
somewhere, it becomes an inconvenience. If there's differing perception, if an
older patient does not think they need that drug then they will not take that
drug. They have poor eyesight, they won't see where the drug is or how to
open the drug. If they have arthritis, they have difficulty in opening certain
--- page 7 ---
containers and patients with cognitive impairment would tend to forget to take
that drug. So those are some of the reasons why you have poor compliance in
older patients. So strategies to improve compliance include adequate clinical
assessment and accurate diagnosis in that way you are treating the patient for
what they actually have. And before prescribing, even for a diagnosis that
is confirmed, you need to ask yourself is this drug necessary? And are there any
simple drug regimens you can give to the patients and you always start with
low doses and you increase slowly. Try to avoid polypharmacy and
consider non-pharmacological therapy. Consider potential drug interaction
with any drug you add for the patient and provide care instructions which can be
both verbal and written. It's better if you also have written just in case the
patient came alone than the family members at home can help. Then always
review the patient and their medication regularly. This includes over-the-counter
medications, supplements or anything else the patient might be taking. So when
you're looking at aiachrogenesis, we don't only talk about adverse drug
--- page 8 ---
reaction. We also talk about adverse events that are related to medical and
missing care. So when you're looking at hospitalization, for instance, you look
at clinical aortrogenesis and functional aortrogenesis. So clinical
aortrogenesis, you are looking at the side effects of the medical intervention
like procedures you're going to do to the patient. It can be drugs, it can be
operation, it can be anything really. Then you're looking at diagnostic
intervention like you are doing plural tabs, you are you doing bone marrow
aspirates for diagnosis. And therapeutic interventions like you're giving
the chemotherapy for a cancer. So those fall under clinical aortrogenesis. So
should a patient get adverse events from those things that's termed clinical
aortrogenesis. Then functional aortrogenesis is the side effects of the process of
those interventions. Because the patient is sick, you're going to get you're
going to admit them to the hospital. Then they get adverse events related to
the admission to the hospital. So those would be functional aortrogenesis. We'll
talk about in the next slide. And when you look at the statistics, more than 50
--- page 9 ---
percent of patients over the age of 70 years, they experience a decline in
physical and cognitive function. That is not related to their admitting diagnosis.
So when you look at hospitalization, patients who are in the hospital tend to
have excess bed rest. They tend to be immobile. There is increased risk of
falls on patients who are admitted. There is incontinence because they are in
bed most of the time. And they tend to have increased risk of delirium and anorexia,
which may be related to them being sick and also the taste of the hospital food.
Then there's additional interventions that happen in the hospital. Some patients may
end up confused and they end up having been restrained and they end up being
sedatives or psychotropics or patients might not be eating because of their
admission diagnosis and they end up being given nazochastic tubes. And they might
be admitted for a medical condition that needs them to have urine output
monitored. Like if they are in renal failure, then they will have urinary
catheters inserted. Then the additional complications which are as a result of
additional interventions that you do to the patient is because they are sleeping in bed for
--- page 10 ---
a prolonged period. They tend to have pressure source and they tend to have
increased risk of getting delirium. They get agitated because then bed also,
there's an increased risk of different proboscis and pulmonary embolism. There's a risk of aspiration
pneumonias. They have urinary catheters, which increases the risk of urinary attack infections.
There is a risk of hospital-acquired infections. Patients tend to get depressed and
have a disruptive behavior. All of these things they add to the functional loss
that the patients will. Coming back to this case scenario,
Dichlophinac is the drug you will stop on this patient. Remember we said that
Dichlophinac or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs interfere with the efficacy of anti-hypertensives,
anti-anginal, and anti-cadiac failure drugs. This is why the blood pressure is high on this
patient. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs also have a high risk of causing
peptic ulcer disease. Hence the patient came with epicastric pain. They are also at risk for
impairing renal function. That's why there's deterioration in the renal function. So that is
the drug you're stopping this patient. That is the end of our eoxygenesis lecture. Thank you.
