--- page 1 ---
Hello, this is Dr. Mantello from the Department of Geriatrics. Welcome to a lecture on urinary incontinence.
The objectives of this lecture is for you to understand the age-related changes in the urogenital system,
to be able to differentiate between the types of urinary incontinence and to know the causes of the incontinence,
have an approach to management and know the indications for catheterization.
Urinary incontinence is one of the geriatric syndromes. It affects 30% of community-dwelling women above the age of 60 years old,
and 5 to 10% of these have severe urinary incontinence. It affects 6% in community-dwelling men above the age of 60 years old.
This prevalence increases with age, it affects 30 to 50% of frail and cognitive impaired community-dwellers,
--- page 2 ---
and 50 to 70% of individuals in nursing homes have severe urinary incontinence.
So, looking at why older patients in particular are in a high risk of getting urinary incontinence,
it's all related to the age-related changes in the structure and function of the urinary tract system.
As one ages, there is increased number of involuntary detresa contractions with detresa of activity,
so the detresa is a muscle around the bladder. It becomes overactive as one age.
There is also increased post-void residual volume of 5200 males. Post-void residual volume is the urine that gets left after you've passed urine.
There is increased nocturnal fluid expression as one age. This is due to the low nocturnal antidiuretic hormone secretion,
--- page 3 ---
and inappropriate nocturnal production of arterial naturally urtic peptide.
There is also increased prosthetic volume in men as they get older. These can lead to obstruction in 50% of their time.
There is also decreased bladder capacity, so the bladder cannot hold a lot of urine.
There is decreased detresa contractility, so when you pass urine, the detresa muscle of the bladder needs to have tension.
It needs to contract for that urine to be expelled. So, that is decreased as you get older, and the detresa muscle cannot sustain the tension,
hence you have increased post-vodal residual volume. There is also decreased ability to postpone waiting.
When you are still younger, you are able to sit through the lecture and go pass urine afterwards, but there is one age that ability reduces.
--- page 4 ---
There is also decreased in urethral closing ability in women, especially menopausal women due to obstruction deficiency.
The six types of urinary incontinence are stress, edge, overflow, reflex, functional, and mixed.
In stress urinary incontinence, there is weakening of the pelvic floor muscles, and when there is increased abdominal pressure,
like when one coughs, laughs or sneezes, the urine leaks. In edge, there is this overwhelming edge to go to the toilet and it's frequent,
and this is driven by an overactive bladder. In overflow, there is something blocking the urine until the bladder is so distended that it ends up stretching the urethra or pen in the urine leaks.
In reflex, there is damage in the connections to the brain that tells the brain this person needs to pass urine until the urine leaks.
In functional, there is nothing wrong in the urogen at all systems, that there is something blocking the patient to get to the bathroom, like they are very ill,
--- page 5 ---
or they have a fracture until the urine passes out, or they have cognitive impairment, they can't remember they need to pass urine.
In mixed, it's usually a mixture of stress and edge incontinence.
Urine incontinence can be acute or chronic. These are reversible conditions that are associated with acute urinary incontinence.
We use a mnemonic drip, which D is for delirium.
R is for restricted mobility, like patients who have pain, osteoarthritis, comatoid arthritis, fractures, or postoperatively, they can't get to the toilet in time.
Patients who have retention, which can be as a result of using drugs like anticholinigics, patients who have fecal impaction, or blood outflow obstruction.
Their eye is for infection. It's also for inflammation, like patients who have atrophic urethritis, or in vaginitis, that happens a lot in patients who are postmenopausal.
--- page 6 ---
R is also for imperfection, like fecal impaction.
Then P is for polyureal, like patients who have glycosuria, who have hypacalsemia, who drink a lot of caffeine, or alcohol.
Patients who have nocturnal polyureal, like patients who have cardiac failure.
And P is for pills, again, like drugs, like diuretics, cytotropic drugs, alpha blockers, alcohol, and calcium channel blockers.
These are the factors that predispose a patient to having chronic urinary incontinence, like patients who have had vaginal child birth, especially those who had neuromuscular damage.
During the delivery, patients who have pelvic floor prolapse, patients who have had a post-transurricular section of the prostate.
This is an operation done for prosthetic cancer.
--- page 7 ---
Patients who are obese because of the increase in club abdominal pressure. Patients who smoke.
Patients who have cognitive decline.
Diabetes mellitus is an independent risk factor for urinary incontinence in patients who have had cerebral vascular accidents.
Management of urinary incontinence includes non-pharmacological and pharmacological.
Non-pharmacological, there is prevention, for instance, avoiding taking lots of caffeine or alcohol.
Kigel exercises which are pelvic floor exercises.
There is prompted timed or timed avoiding, where the patient will have specific times.
--- page 8 ---
They just go to the bathroom without waiting for the urine to start leaking.
Then there is bladder training exercises.
Then there is pharmacological treatment, where in age urinary incontinence in women, you would give anticholinetics.
But when you listen to the eartrogenesis lecture, then you would know that there are problems with using anticholinetics.
Then in men with overactive bladder or urine or in age incontinence, you would use alpha blockers.
So indications for chronic indwelling urine or catheter in patients with urinary incontinence include
patients who have urinary retention, that urinary retention if it causes persistent overflow incontinence,
--- page 9 ---
or it causes urinary tract infections or ends up in renal failure.
If the urinary retention cannot be corrected by treatment or surgery, if they cannot intermittently catheterize themselves.
Or if there is a quantamination you worried about, like in patients who have pressure ulcers or wounds around the perinale area that you want to heal.
Patients who are terminally ill or impaired, and sometimes it's a patient preference or a caregiver preference.
This is the end of our urinary incontinence lecture. Thank you.
