--- page 11 ---
lities,
the South African pneumonia guidelines recommends using the WHO case definition for the diagnosis
of PCP in individuals with HIV.
The diagnosis requires the presence of disneyone exertion or non-productive cough or tachypnea
and fever, together with bilateral infiltrates on a chest radiograph and the exclusion of
a bacterial pneumonia.
Several non-intricious illnesses may mimic a community acquired pneumonia and some of
these are indicated on the slide and include pulmonary edema, pulmonary embolism particularly
when pulmonary infarction accompanies this as a complication, pulmonary hemorrhage, chemical
pneumonitis including aspiration, lung cancer and acute exacerbations of interstitial lung
disease COPD or asthma.
The treatment of pneumonia has evolved over the last two decades with a growing evidence-based
supporting an empilic antibiotic treatment strategy.
The considerations for selecting initial antibiotics include several important evidence-based
factors.
The severity of illness using scoring systems such as curve and therefore the site of care
is the first consideration.
Implicit in such a risk assessment is ensuring that older patients are also distinctly recognized
as is their predisposition to developing atypical pneumonias.
The use of antibiotics in the preceding 90 days has been associated with infection by
both in atypical organisms as well as resistant organisms.
The presence of comorbidities including the challenge of HIV in our setting have been
demonstrated to increase the risk of death from pneumonia and each of these comorbidities
may be associated with a predisposition to a certain pathogen.
It seems reasonable that they would form part of one's considerations for selecting
initial antibiotics.
--- page 12 ---
Drug intolerance is another obvious reason to eliminate certain drug classes from your
armamentarium while the ever-increasing call for antibiotic stewardship should serve as
a basis for dissuading us from selecting drugs without due considerations for the risk of
hastening the loss of these drugs to resistance and for minimizing the risks of antibiotic
exposure in our patients.
Taken together, we recognize that younger patients without comorbidities and who have
not recently been exposed to antibiotics can safely be managed based on the severity
of their illness alone.
Ourohydosomoxicillin is recommended for the treatment of this subset of patients with
curb scores of 0 or 1.
A curb score of 2 or more in this subset of patients requires broadening of cover to
include resistant streptococcus and atypical organisms.
To achieve this, treatment with amoxicillin cavulanate or a second or third-generation
kepusporin and a macrolide is necessary.
Those older than the age of 65 years or patients who have comorbidities or who have
been exposed to antibiotics in the preceding 90 days are offered broader antibiotic cover
even with less severe disease, recognizing their predisposition to resistant organisms
and atypical organisms.
As outpatients, they are offered a amoxicillin cavulanate or an oral second-generation kepusporin
while as inpatients, they may be offered a third-generation kepusporin to include cover
for gram-negative intracocki and highly resistant streptococcus.
The use of macrolides in this instance has become commonplace in such older patients
with comorbidities because of their increased risk of atypical infection.
Severe pneumonia or the requirement of intensive care support are indeed hard indications
to include a macrolide in the treatment of pneumonia.
While respiratory fluoroquinolones are an attractive alternative as they may be used
--- page 13 ---
in all instances, its strong activity against tuberculosis should drive us to protect the
drug from resistance so that we may preserve it for the significant challenge of drug-resistant
TB.
What about empiric therapy for PCP and TB?
Despite the diagnostic difficulty encountered with PCP, it is recommended that empiric treatment
be offered to all HIV-infected patients who meet the clinical case definition of PCP.
In these patients, no further investigation for PCP may be necessary.
In patients who are at risk but who do not fulfill the WHO case definition for PCP, specific
testing is recommended up to and including bronchoscopy.
Infected treatment for TB, however, should be more limited, especially in the present
era of molecular diagnostic tools.
However, two instances for empiric TB treatment remain.
The first is that of Mollary tuberculosis where the diagnosis can be made on chest radiograph
alone.
And the second is the instance of septic shock occurring in at-risk HIV-infected patients
where the threshold of risk in benefit shifts in favor of early empiric therapy.
Empiric treatment for influenza is a concern during the South African influenza season,
which occurs between June and September each year.
During this period, we should suspect the diagnosis in patients with pneumonia who have
a preceding history of upper respiratory tract symptoms.
Empiric treatment during influenza season is recommended for patients with risk factors
including pregnancy, HIV, diabetes, chronic lung disease, neurological disease, and in
individuals of older age.
In all other patients where the clinical suspicion is high, a nasopharyngeal aspirate for influenza
PCR can be performed to guide the decision on whether to treat or not.
In recent years, the search for adjunctive therapies to improve treatment success has
--- page 14 ---
intensified.
Statins were one of the earliest candidate adjunctive agents investigated given their
theoretical benefits of immunomodulation, anti-inflammatory effect, and direct antimicrobial
effect.
There is now extensive evidence to suggest that patients with existing statin use at
the time of an incident episode of pneumonia do better than patients without a similar exposure
to statin.
Patients who have been previously treated with statins therefore should remain on their
statin during their hospitalization.
The question of whether statins should be used specifically for the treatment of pneumonia
is less well answered.
A single randomized controlled trial, including 34 patients from Spain, provided the only
high quality trial evidence for attempting to answer the question.
Sadly, the trial failed to demonstrate significant declines in the cytokine profile, time to
clinical stability, or mortality.
The trial was underpowered to answer the latter questions definitively, but nonetheless did
not provide any support for the use of statins in the treatment of pneumonia.
Quotico steroids are now uniformly applied in the treatment of septic shock, where its
role in attenuating the inflammatory response has been clearly demonstrated.
Although a theoretical benefit might accrue in the treatment of CAP by way of reducing
the incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome, the difficulty has been establishing
consensus on which steroid to take and what dose to apply or what the candidate length
of treatment might be.
A recent meta-analysis identified 12 trials of corticosteroids in pneumonia, 6 trials
in severe pneumonia, and 6 in moderate community acquired pneumonia.
An apparent mortality benefit was found in patients who met the criteria for severe community
--- page 15 ---
acquired pneumonia, but not in those who did not.
A similar benefit in the reduction of the incidence of ARDS was attributed to corticosteroid
use.
However, the use of steroids is not without risk, and an increased risk of hypoglycemia
requiring treatment was seen in patients treated with corticosteroids.
More recently, a randomized controlled trial of hydrocortisone in severe community acquired
pneumonia helped provide high impact evidence for this question.
The study showed that steroids reduced the risk of intubation and death in patients admitted
to the ICU with severe community acquired pneumonia.
Corticortisone at 200 milligrams per day for 4 to 8 days and initiated within 24 hours
of diagnosis was sufficient to achieve this effect.
However, caution should be applied in individuals with immunosuppression including HIV who are
not well represented in this trial.
Overall, there appears to be benefits in the use of corticosteroids in the treatment of
severe pneumonia.
Although the risk of hypoglycemia remains an important concern.
Some caution should be applied in establishing time to clinical stability in patients treated
with steroid.
A steroid may help to treat the inflammation and resolve some of the symptoms and resolve
some of the signs related to inflammation, and these should therefore not be used in
the establishment of resolution of infection.
It may therefore be reasonable to use steroids in patients with severe pneumonia requiring
ICU admission perhaps in those with CRPs more than 150 milligrams per liter and then to
remember some of the restraint that must be applied in treating patients with influenza
or tuberculosis for whole steroid exposure might be detrimental.
In particular, we should be mindful that the evidence does not yet extend to patients
--- page 16 ---
with immunosuppression.
Early switching from intravenous to oral antibiotics is a central pillar of antibiotic
stewardship.
It reduces the cost of care, the incidence of complications arising from intravenous
cannula and promotes a reduction in the length of hospital stay.
The switch should be made once clinical stability is achieved and oral antibiotics should be
used until a total treatment duration of 5 to 7 days is reached unless specific indications
to do so otherwise are present.
The assessment of clinical stability is made when the patient is hemodynamically stable,
has achieved stable disability parameters, is a febrile and has a normal mental state.
Importantly, the patient should be able to tolerate oral medication.
Patients can be discharged after 24 hours of clinical stability usually after at least
5 days of antibiotic treatment.
When patients fail to respond to antibiotic therapy, one should consider several possible
explanations.
The following factors may have some bearing on responsiveness to empiric antibiotic treatment.
These include the age of the patient and the extent of the disease where older age and
more extensive disease may require longer duration of treatment.
The organism responsible for pneumonia in a particular instance might be resistant to
the antibiotic selected through an empiric choice.
Unusual pathogens requiring tailored antimicrobial selection might be present.
The condition of the underlying lung may require either alterations to the drug type,
the dosage or the treatment duration.
Complications of pneumonia might have arisen including embalema, necrotizing pneumonia
or lung abscesses.
Furthermore, several important non-infective diseases might present as pneumonia and these
--- page 17 ---
must be considered if patients fail to respond to antibiotics.
Acute complications from pneumonia should be considered in any patient who does not
improve on antibiotic therapy.
While parent mnemonic infusions occur in almost 40% of cases, these infusions are usually
small, exudative and respond to the treatment of pneumonia.
However, direct infection of the plural space may also occur and may result in either
a complicated plural effusion or an embalema.
Pluristenthesis in the persistent or large effusion should promptly be performed.
The findings of a low plural pH, low plural fluid glucose and elevated plural fluid LDH
reflects bacterial metabolic activity and supports the findings of a direct plural infection.
If microorganisms are identified either by Gram-Staino culture, the diagnosis can
be revised to amperema.
In both instances, treatment with an extended course of antibiotics, usually with an intercostal
drain in place, is warranted.
Infection in immunocompromised hosts or with organisms which result in an necrotizing
pneumonia should prompt a close examination for lung abscesses.
Which when present require protracted antibiotic therapy for 4-6 weeks.
If there is no microbiological guidance for antibiotic selection, both Klebsiella and
sensitive Staphylococcus aureus should be covered for the entire treatment duration.
Unlike chronic lung abscesses, these patients generally have favourable outcomes, while
the need for percutaneous or surgical drainage remains infrequently required.
It is now a growing recognition of the increased risk of cardiovascular events in patients
presenting with pneumonia, especially in older patients with risk factors for cardiovascular
disease.
These events may be an acute coronary syndrome, acute or decompensated cardiac failure or
arrhythmias.
--- page 18 ---
The pathogenesis of this interaction is unclear, but in the case of acute coronary
syndromes, there is likely a link with the increased platelet activation seen during
pneumonia.
It is now recommended that all patients with risk factors for cardiovascular disease or
who fail to respond to standard therapy be evaluated for a cardiovascular event.
The precipitous nature of pneumonia is misleading, as there may be significant implications to
long-term health.
In the lung, a single episode of pneumonia is sufficient to trigger the vicious cycle
of bronchiectasis and recurrent pneumonia.
More recently, the long-term mortality following an episode of pneumonia has become of great
interest.
A meta-analysis of long-term mortality in such patients demonstrates that between 30 and
50 percent of patients are dead five years after an episode of pneumonia.
This relationship has been difficult to elucidate as causal, because there is understandably
significant confounding by common risk factors for pneumonia and for death, including advancing
age and comorbid disease profiles.
There is, however, evidence of excess mortality in patients who suffer cardiovascular events
or acute kidney injuries during an acute episode of pneumonia.
Follow-up studies in pneumonia have demonstrated a persistent pro-inflammatory and pro-coagulant
state in such patients as much as one year after an incident episode of pneumonia.
An additional and interesting finding is that patients who fail to demonstrate features
of a robust inflammatory response during an episode of severe pneumonia are at greatest
risk of mortality.
These patients can be characterized as having severe pneumonia based on physiological characteristics
but who do not demonstrate pyrexia, choles or severe elevation in the ACRP.
It is postulated that this dissociation between disease severity and inflammatory response
--- page 19 ---
reflects underlying immunological dysregulation, which may herald poor long-term survival.
Perhaps the most successful strategy in our response to the challenge of community-acquired
pneumonia has been the introduction of pneumococcal vaccination, initially in our childhood
vaccination schedule and later in our adult vaccination guidelines.
Certainly the pneumococcal vaccine has been effective.
It reduces the risk of pneumococcal pneumonia by 45-75%, even in individuals with HIV, albeit
predominantly in those with CD4 counts above 200 cells per cubic millimeter.
It also reduces the risk of invasive pneumococcal disease by almost 75%.
In advanced HIV, there have been no head-to-head trials of PPSV23 and PCV13, but there is promising
observational data for sequential immunization in this population.
Although there have been no prospective studies demonstrating a mortality benefit in patients
with advanced HIV, that is those individuals with CD4 cell counts under 200 cells per
cubic millimeter, the demonstration of a favorable induced antibody response and a good safety
profile of the vaccines has supported the role of vaccination in this population.
The 23 valent polysaccharide vaccine has largely been superseded by the 13 valent conjugated
pneumococcal vaccine, which protects against the 13 most common pathogenic serotypes and
is capable of inducing a more robust and more durable antibody response.
Nonetheless, both vaccines are available in South Africa and the current recommendation
for PPSV23 is for all adults 65 years or older or in younger adults with co-morbid
disease who are current smokers who are asplenic or who are HIV infected.
PPSV requires a second booster vaccination five years after the initial vaccination in
these patients.
The 13 valent conjugate vaccine is indicated in all adults 50 years or older.
Younger adults with co-morbid disease who are current smokers who are asplenic or who are
HIV infected should also be vaccinated.
In those at greatest risk for invasive pneumococcal disease, it is now acceptable to provide
--- page 20 ---
sequential vaccination with PCV13 first followed by PPSV23 a year later.
The efficacy of influenza vaccination is less predictable as the vaccine changes each year
in response to the profile of circulating strains of influenza viruses.
The vaccine has demonstrated efficacy in reducing the incidence of severe disease, hospital
admissions and mortality, but the magnitude of effect understandably varies each year.
The vaccine is available from March each year in South Africa and is indicated in all pregnant
women, adults 65 years and older or in younger adults with co-morbid disease.
It is also indicated in all healthcare workers.
In summary, community acquired pneumonia is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality.
The diagnosis relies on clinical and radiological findings.
Severity scoring is essential and the curb 65 score is an easy to perform tool in most
settings.
The extent of investigation should be guided by the severity of illness.
To boculosis and PCP, I important considerations in HIV endemic settings.
Initial antibiotic selection is empiric but is guided by the risk profile of the patient
and the severity of the illness.
Early intravenous to oral antibiotic switching is an important goal of care.
Short-term and long-term complications of pneumonia should be addressed and vaccination
is a crucial preventative intervention for pneumonia.
Thank you.
