--- page 1 ---
Welcome to this presentation on community acquired pneumonia presented on behalf of the division
of pulmonology and critical care.
I will be discussing the epidemiology of community acquired pneumonia with a focus on
data available from local disease surveillance activities.
I will cover the diagnosis of pneumonia, addressing nuances in a resource constrained
high TB HIV burden setting.
I will talk briefly about the importance of severity scoring before moving on to existing
and novel diagnostic methods for rapidly and accurately diagnosing pneumonia.
I will discuss some important considerations which arise from the high prevalence of HIV
and TB in our local population.
The management of pneumonia has evolved over the years to an evidence-based empiric treatment
strategy based on the risk profile of the patient and the severity of the illness and
so I will address some of the factors which inform our treatment decision making.
And lastly, I will be covering the important progress that has been made in preventing
this leading curable cause of death in South Africa.
The most widely used definition of pneumonia describes the disease as an infection of the
low respiratory tract resulting in perincomer lung inflammation.
This is most commonly associated with symptoms of acute infection including a cough of recent
onset, sputum production, shortness of breath and protic chest pain.
The diagnosis also requires the presence of new infiltrates on a chest radiograph.
To differentiate the disease from nosocomium pneumonias, patients should have no risk factors
for healthcare-associated pneumonia and should not be hospitalized or reside in a
long-term care facility.
Influenza and pneumonia along with tuberculosis are amongst the top 10 causes of death in
--- page 2 ---
South Africa and represent the leading causes of death from curable infectious diseases.
The incidence of pneumonia arising from sentinel surveillance data is exceedingly high at
about 400,000 population.
The peak incidence occurs in those aged 25 to 64 years of age likely being driven by the
burgeoning HIV epidemic in this age group.
Indeed, the HIV prevalence in hospitalized patients with pneumonia is estimated at 70%
and has been shown to be as high as 90% in those aged 25 to 44 years old.
The case fatality rate for pneumonia overall is around 5%.
While this figure rises to 12% in individuals requiring hospitalization and over 40% in
those requiring intensive care support.
The risk factors for pneumonia are older age, the presence of comorbidities including respiratory
conditions such as COPD and asthma, cardiac disease, cerebrovascular disease and immunosuppressing
conditions such as diabetes and HIV.
A recent viral respiratory tract infection often sets an individual up for subsequent
superimposed bacterial pneumonia and substance abuse including alcohol, smoking and illicit
substance use or contribute to risk for pneumonia.
In South Africa and in many parts of the developing world structural factors including
poverty, overcrowding and pollution contribute to the burden of pneumonia.
The etiology of pneumonia has been widely reported from most of the world and there has been
a substantial amount of agreement amongst the global data on the key pathogens.
The world over mixed viral and bacterial infections are common and the identification of a single
organism by routine laboratory methods may be misleading in directing therapy.
While pneumococcal pneumonia has predominated as the microorganism responsible for most
cases of pneumonia there has been a global decrease in the proportion of disease attributed
--- page 3 ---
to pneumococcus following the introduction of pneumococcal vaccination.
In South Africa the vaccine was introduced into the routine infant immunization schedule
in 2009 and we are likely to see the cohort effect of this in the adult population in
the near future.
Pediotic outbreaks of influenza A and lesionella for example have punctuated the otherwise
consistent pattern of epidemiology of pneumonia in this part of the world.
A key finding in settings of endemic tuberculosis such as South Africa is that tuberculosis
can and does present as an acute pneumonia.
Globally pneumococcus is the commonest cause of pneumonia across all treatment settings
when an organism is found that is.
Importantly in 40% of the cases even after invasive investigation a pathogen is not identified.
Note here that viruses and atypical organisms occupy the remaining spots in the top 5 causes
of pneumonia globally and that TB does not feature on this list.
However, in a prospective observational study of pneumonia in hospitalised patients in
Durban who were investigated by expectorated sputum, induced sputum and bronchoscopy were
required the picture was quite different.
In this high TB HIV burden setting tuberculosis was identified in almost 40% of cases of pneumonia
outranking pneumococcus in this population.
This was true in patients with HIV but it was also true in the HIV negative population.
The diagnosis of pneumonia has remained a clinical one requiring symptoms and signs of low respiratory
tract infection as well as radiological evidence of new infiltrates on chest radiograph.
The most commonly reported symptoms include cough, sputum production, shortness of breath
and puritic chest pain while signs may be localised to the lung or maybe systemic.
The importance of radiographic evidence of infection is highlighted by the limitations
--- page 4 ---
of using only symptoms and signs to establish the diagnosis.
Although cough was found to be the most common art patient to complain, pneumonia was established
as the diagnosis in only 5% of these individuals.
Indeed, when the symptom of cough in the absence of other respiratory symptoms is accompanied
by a normal chest radiograph, the diagnosis of pneumonia is accurately ruled out.
In a systematic review and meta-analysis of using symptoms and signs based diagnostic
algorithms for pneumonia, this approach correctly identified pneumonia as the cause of the clinical
findings in only 50% of patients.
An additional and potentially more useful finding however was that the absence of tachycardia,
tachycardia, fever or hypoxemia reliably excluded pneumonia in over 95% of patients.
Chest radiography therefore remains the gold standard for establishing the diagnosis of
pneumonia and indeed a normal chest radiograph is able to exclude the diagnosis of pneumonia
except in very specific circumstances.
The predominant radiological pattern seen are those demonstrated on this slide including
lower infiltration as well as alternatively interstitial infiltrates.
The air bronchogram remains a key radiological feature for the presence of consolidation
indicative of pneumonia.
So some of those circumstances in which the chest radiograph may be misleading or said
it in a different way in which a normal chest radiograph may fail to exclude pneumonia indicated
on this slide.
These include the elderly where immunosinescence dulls the inflammatory response in the lung
or in immunocompromised hosts for the same reason and in the setting of hypovolemia when
inflammatory excitation is restricted.
Although uncommon early clinical radiological dissociation may occur and in this instance
--- page 5 ---
together with the previously mentioned cases a diagnosis of suspected pneumonia can be made
with a repeat chest radiograph performed in 24 to 48 hours.
Maintaining the diagnosis of pneumonia despite a normal chest radiograph in the absence of
a suitable explanation for the absence of infiltrates is associated with inaccurate diagnosis
and the misuse of antibiotics.
A number of assessment tools have been developed to assist clinicians in assessing the severity
of pneumonia.
One such scoring system is the CURB-65 score which was derived by the British thoracic
society as a tool for deciding the severity of illness and for guiding the most suitable
site of care.
This scoring system has been widely validated since its introduction in 2003 but has never
been validated completely in South Africa.
Nonetheless, it has been recommended by the South African thoracic society because of its
simplicity and because its accuracy is similar to that of more complicated scoring systems
such as the American thoracic society's pneumonia severity index.
This scoring system awards a single point to the presence of each of the components
and accurately predicts the mortality associated with each level of disease severity.
Equally importantly, it provides guidance on the most appropriate site of care based
on that severity score.
The role of biomarkers in the diagnosis of pneumonia has been investigated.
Ultimately, neither the CD active protein nor procalcitonin contribute to improving
the diagnosis of pneumonia.
When clinical evaluation, history and examination are accompanied by a chest radiograph suggestive
of pneumonia, neither the CD active protein nor the procalcitonin add additional diagnostic
--- page 6 ---
benefit.
The CRP can be used in settings where chest radiographs are not available as an elevated
CRP offers similar positive predictive value as a radiograph.
Randomized controlled trial data supports the role of CRP in identifying patients at
risk of treatment failure or death, where using a CRP failure to halve by 3 to 4 days
as a critical threshold is useful for identifying such individuals.
Interestingly, using a composite of clinical features including respiratory rate, temperature,
heart rate and oxygen saturation, performs similarly well for identifying treatment
failure as the CRP, potentially then obviating the need for this test.
In fact, in favorable patients, failure to resolve fever has superior test characteristics
to the CRP in identifying patients at risk for mortality.
The CRP under 100 has strong negative predictive value for 30-day mortality.
It is outperformed in predicting survival by the curb score.
Similarly, the procalcitonin makes no additional contribution to the diagnosis of pneumonia
and has limited prognostic value in the setting of low respiratory tract infections.
Randomized controlled trials evaluating the role of procalcitonin in guiding treatment
decisions reveal that the procalcitonin can be used to support the decision not to initiate
antibiotics.
However, a similar decision can be reached when history, examination and chest radiography
are objectively appraised.
It would appear that clinicians feel less confident to withhold antibiotics based on
their own findings when compared to a laboratory test such as the procalcitoninin.
A different problem arises from trial data which supports the role of the procalcitonin
to guide antibiotic discontinuation, where it has been shown that discontinuing antibiotics
--- page 7 ---
once the PCT has been reduced by 90% from its initial value is safe and is not associated
with an increased risk of treatment failure or mortality.
On the other hand, doing so significantly shortens the duration of exposure to antibiotics.
Despite the high quality evidence, including a Cochrane review, subsequent observational
studies have revealed that despite access to the procalcitonin result, clinicians do
not discontinue antibiotics at this threshold and therefore the benefit of reduced antibiotics
exposure and shortened hospitalizations are lost.
So if the procalcitonin is going to be used and it is found to be reduced by 90% from
its initial value while on treatment, the action to be taken which is the discontinuation
of antibiotics must be followed through on.
In addition, the cost-effectiveness of a PCT guided treatment strategy has not been assessed
and the test remains fairly expensive and therefore present guidelines do not recommend
the test for routine clinical use.
The need for microbiological investigations in pneumonia are still hotly debated and
it has become clearer that there is a small and perhaps negligible role for upfront initial
microbiological investigations in the diagnosis of pneumonia and only limited impact of such
investigations on treatment decisions because existing clinical rules for antibiotic escalation
are in fact sufficient for identifying treatment failure due to the spectrum of cover being
inadequate.
Nonetheless, microbiological investigations may allow for more timely escalation of antibiotic
cover in settings where clinical algorithms are not closely followed resulting in direct
benefit to patients.
In instances where antibiotic activity can be narrowed, society at large benefits from
this principle of antibiotics stewardship.
--- page 8 ---
In addition, the surveillance of etiological agents of pneumonia may continue to help guide
our choices of empiric antibiotics at regional and national levels.
Sputum evaluation is bedeviled by the need for an adequate sputum sample.
Only a minority of patients in fact would produce an adequate sample and the overall
yield of sputum culture is reported at approximately 15% in pneumonia.
In patients with risk factors for staphylococcus aureus pneumonia or gram negative infection,
sputum evaluation is recommended as well as in all patients with a curb 65 score of greater
than equal to 2 and who are therefore hospitalized.
The yield of blood culture is as low as 5% and really impacts clinical decision making
except when staphylococcus aureus infection is a cause and where the positive culture
result might be available early enough to outperform clinical decision rules for guiding
antibiotic choices.
Nonetheless, our local guidelines ask that we consider blood culture in all patients
with a curb score of 2 or more or in individuals with prior exposure to antibiotics and furthermore
that the test not be performed in the outpatient setting.
A reasonable role then for blood culture evaluation may also be in individuals who
are failing treatment for pneumonia.
Other tests such as the urine antigen test for streptococcal pneumonia has been demonstrated
in recent meta-analyses to identify an additional 11% of patients with pneumococcal pneumonia.
However, this did not influence antibiotic choices or ultra-clinical outcomes.
This is unsurprising given that empatic antibiotic regimens for pneumonia always include agents
for pneumococcal cover.
Similarly, urine antigen testing for lesionella is of limited value as the organism is relatively
uncommon in patients with non-severe pneumonia and in all patients with severe pneumonia
--- page 9 ---
they are likely to be appropriately covered by empritic choices.
There have been significant additions to the diagnostic armamentarium by molecular methods
for detecting organisms, although most of these gains have been made in detecting viruses.
The drawbacks are that a positive molecular test does not necessarily imply causality
as the test is positive in a significant proportion of asymptomatic individuals.
Moreover, apart from influenza and perhaps more recently SARS-CoV-2, there are no effective
treatment options for the other common viral causes of pneumonia.
Even when these tests are positive, they do not rule out polymicrobial infection and
the withholding of antibiotics in such instances may be detrimental.
Testing for viral pathogens of pneumonia is therefore not presently recommended except
in patients with severe pneumonia during the influenza season and when effective treatment
with also tamarva with other antiviral agents is available.
Tuberculosis is a leading cause of death from a curable infectious disease and remains a
national and global health challenge.
The intersection of TB and HIV in our setting has intensified the epidemic.
The disease has remained a public health emergency in this country for more than a decade and
our Department of Health recommends annual screening for TB in almost all South Africans.
Local data on the etiology of pneumonia and hospitalized patients reveals that up to 40
percent of these individuals have tuberculosis.
The gene expert assay, a cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test, has replaced sputum
smear as the initial test for TB.
It has excellent diagnostic test characteristics and is outperformed only by the gold standard
of sputum culture, which is limited in the setting of pneumonia by the long turnaround
time.
--- page 10 ---
In patients with HIV who are unable to produce sputum or who cannot produce adequate quality
sputum, the urine-based lamb test has emerged as a useful diagnostic tool.
It has a sensitivity which increases with advancing immunosuppression and approaches
a sensitivity of 85 percent in patients with CD4 counts under 50.
In patients with HIV, TB and pneumococcal pneumonia comprise the majority of cat.
However, pneumocystis arises as an important pathogen.
It is the third most common etiological agent of pneumonia in HIV-infected patients in
our setting.
This is a unique consideration in settings of HIV hyperindimicity and is of particular
concern given the high mortality associated with the disease, even when optimal treatment
is applied.
The challenge we are faced with is that the accurate diagnosis of PCP requires identification
of the organism on a Bronco-LViola-Lavage specimen requiring a relatively invasive process
of sample acquisition in a setting where bronchoscopy may not be widely available and in a subset
of patients who may not be suitable candidates for such an invasive diagnostic procedure.
Existing laboratory methods including immunofluorescence performs poorly on expected sputum or induced
sputum, identifying at most 60 percent of cases.
PCR-based tests have improved sensitivity but suffer from a high false positive rate
because the genetic material of the organism may be found in patients without the disease.
While B2D glucant testing capable of identifying fungal cell work components may be useful
in the diagnosis of PCP, its role has not yet been terrified in the setting of HIV and
is therefore not presently recommended for routine clinical use.
Given the significant burden of PCP in our setting and our limited diagnostic capabi