--- page 11 ---
g cancers.
Other perineoplastic manifestations are the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone.
It's seen in around 10% of patients with small cell lung cancer, and the symptoms of those
of hyponatremia. Cerebral edema may also occur in extreme cases.
Cushing syndrome is caused by exposure to high levels of glucocorticoids,
which are produced by the lung cancer, usually small cell lung cancer. In rare cases, it can be
produced by ectopic ACTH, which drives an increase in glucocorticoids,
and the clinical presentation is that of hypertension, hypoglycemia,
immune facies, muscle weakness, a purple stria, and a buffalo hemp.
In finally, hypertrophic osteoarthropathy is characterized by clubbing and period of status,
that swelling of the bones of the wrist. It features a symmetrical painful arthropathy,
which affects the distal joints and the wrists and ankles.
So here we have a picture of the clubbing, which is part of the syndrome of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy,
and is associated with lung cancer.
Okay, so in terms of the diagnosis of lung cancer,
you need to take a good history, and the following are important aspects of history
taking, so the presenting complaint, which we've discussed in the slide and clinical presentation.
So it's important to ask for these symptoms, the unsaid duration, whether they're any alleviating
or aggravating factors and associated symptoms. So you need to get a complete medical history,
including comorbid illnesses, as well as assessing risk factors for the development of lung cancer.
That is exposure to asbestos, or other occupational exposures,
a history of cigarette smoking, a family history of lung cancer,
--- page 12 ---
and environmental and lifestyle exposures as well. A thorough review of the system,
so a thorough system inquiry should be conducted to determine if there are any symptoms indicative
of metastases or of a perineoplastic syndrome. And then on physical examination,
and so again, a physical examination in lung cancer can be very non-specific, and it can also
be completely normal. And the absence of clinically significant findings does not rule out lung cancer.
You may get loss of weight, finger clapping, those two are very suggested, especially in a patient who
is a smoker. You may get dullness to percussion due to the actual tumour,
or lung collapse if the tumour is an epoxymal airway. You may get deviation of the trachea
to the side of the tumour. Also, that might be due to lung collapse. You might find
survival in bed and apathy, and that's really important to look for in a patient who you
suspect of having lung cancer. And you might find features of a plural effusion.
So this image over here shows a cervical lymph node in the lady who says lung cancer.
Just to briefly go over the symptoms and signs of lung cancer, because it's a lot of information,
I just thought we could summarize it on this slide. So the symptoms can include a cough,
hemoptosis, shortness of breath, wheezing, pain, signs of a plural effusion,
or that would be chest pain and exercise intolerance.
And then you might also get signs of superior vena cavons obstruction. That's pemberton sign
where you raise your arms up and look for congestion and blushing of the face. You might
find pousness of voice, which is suggestive of a recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. You may see
an elevated hemidifram on chest x-ray, which can suggest a phrenic nerve palsy. You may also get
dysphagia due to esophageal compression. And then there may also be symptoms and signs of
metastases to the brain, spinal cord, bones, liver.
--- page 13 ---
And then lastly to go through the perineoplastic syndrome. So hypercalcemia,
which we said is often associated with gramacyl carcinoma, trisose, which is a syndrome of hypercage
mobility. So you'll get DVTs and pulmonary embalae, which is more commonly found in adenocarcinoma.
Cloving and hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy, which can be found in all types of lung cancer,
both non-small cell and small cell lung cancer, syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion,
ectopic ACTH production with cushings, and eaten lambard syndrome are more common in small cell
lung cancers. And there are other perineoplastic syndromes, the central nervous system, which
you can get in all lung cancers, which we haven't discussed in this lecture.
So how do you investigate a patient who you suspect of having lung cancer?
Firstly, you can do the barotry investigations such as a full blood count.
This might be used to look for anemia, a high white cell count, a high platelet count,
or hypercogulable disorders. Blood tests can also be used to look for metastases in the liver,
where you'll find increased LP and GGT, or bone, which will give you a raised LP.
A UNE is important to look for hyponatremia, which might suggest a syndrome of an appropriate ADH
secretion, and to know the patient's fitness for further treatment.
And a serum calcium is important at patients with lung cancer, because it's a common perineoplastic
manifestation. They often have a raised serum calcium, either due to a perineoplastic syndrome
or due to metastases to divide.
In terms of imaging investigations, chest x-ray is the first line investigation and suspected
lung cancer. The findings you may find are single or multiple messes, plural fusions or
lung collapse, and enlargement of the high limb. We have some examples of chest x-rays to go through,
and these two images, you can see a large mess. This is in the left upper lobe of the lung,
--- page 14 ---
and here there's a mess, which might be in the, it's in the right lower zone of the lung,
possibly in the right lower lobe or right middle lobe. So those are messes,
and the other things you can find are on chest x-ray or cavitating messes.
So this is a cavitating mess on chest x-ray and on CT scan. Here you have collapse of the
entire left side of the lung, giving you a whiter. You can also get this with very large plural
of fusion, and it's important to confirm that there is fluid musing and ultrasound before
inserting a needle into this, because you don't want to cause damage if there is no fluid there.
You often won't cause a, I mean, you shouldn't cause a pneumothorax in this, because usually
if the entire lung is collapsed, you won't stick a needle onto aerated lung. So, and this
shows a plural of fusion with a meniscus, and probably underlying lung collapse in the,
in the patient with a lung tumor.
Other emerging investigations you can use are CT scans of the lung. So CT scan is much more
sensitive and specific. Higher resolution CT scans of the chest have a higher sensitivity at
around 85%, and a specificity of around 100%, compared to chest x-rays for detecting primary
lung cancer. And a normal chest x-ray does not rule out the possibility of having a primary
lung tumor, because small tumors may not be seen on chest x-ray. So if your index of suspicion is
high, or the patient has risk factors like cigarette smoking or occupational exposures,
chronic lung disease, and your suspicious of lung cancer, and the chest x-ray looks normal,
you should then proceed to do a high resolution CT of the lungs. CTs can provide information
about the tumor size, the presence or absence of separate tumor nodules, lung collapse,
obstructive pneumonias, the invasion of adjacent structures, and the proximal extent of the tumor,
which is important in staging and deciding about resection.
--- page 15 ---
And it can also identify sites of involvement, which can help to select optimal site for biopsy
to confirm the diagnosis. You can also, once you have a CT scan that shows mass,
or that is very suggestive of lung cancer, or you have a histological diagnosis,
you should then proceed to doing a CT staging scan of the chest abdomen and pelvis,
which looks for the presence of metastases,
or a PET CT scan. A PET CT scan is more expensive investigation. It involves using glucose,
so it uses bluro dioxid glucose, and then looks for uptake in more cells in the body.
So areas where there is high metabolic activity are consistent with cancer or infection,
so it can be used to find either metastases or to more reliably detect
mediastinal lymph node involvement in a staging CT scan. Another investigation that you can use
to look for metastases is an MRI scan of the brain. So a staging CT, if you don't have a PET CT
and an MRI of the brain available to you,
but if you do, then doctors often opt for PET CT and an MRI, if it's available to them.
So a biopsy and tissue is needed to make a definite diagnosis of lung cancer,
so you need to get tissue, and you can do this by sending off sputum for cytology.
You can send a plural for cytology. It might give you a diagnosis. On cytology, they can
usually give you a diagnosis of lung cancer, and they can tell you whether it is a cell lung
cancer or non-small cell lung cancer, and depending on the amount of cellular material,
they can sometimes even tell you whether there are any mutations if it is a non-small cell
lung cancer, but often if you want to do a mutational analysis to look for specific gene
mutations in the cancer, then you need to do a bronchoscopy or some sort of surgery.
Tharachoscopy is where they insert a camera into the plural space, and then they do a biopsy
--- page 16 ---
via that. Tharachotomy is open lung surgery, or they can put a camera into the media stylum
to get a piece of tissue from other the lung or the lymph nodes.
Percutaneous biopsy or fine needle aspiration may also be used if the tumor is peripheral
to biopsy lung cancer tissue.
So lung cancer is staged using the T&M staging. Teeth is often assessed by tumor size, but also
by relationship of the tumor with the earway and invasion to the surrounding structures
and presence of multiple nodules in the lung. That all affects your T's
designation. The in component represents lymph nodes, and it's influenced by the location of the
lymph nodes involved with M1 representing higher lymph nodes and M2 representing
media stylumph nodes. And the M designation represents metastases.
Presence of metastases is always considered stage four disease. So for your purposes,
you just need to know that non-small cell lung cancer and small cell nerve is staged using T&M
staging. After you've given the lung cancer a T designation in designation and in designation,
then there is a staging, which is stage 0 to 4, which is used to prognosticate the lung cancer
and decide on treatment. So small cell lung cancer has traditionally been staged as limited
or extensive disease based on the ability to treat small cell lung cancer with a single
radiation treatment bill. So limited diseases that cancers only present in one side of the chest,
and extensive diseases cancer is present bilaterally in the chest, or there's a
plural of usual distant mets, which means it's not radio-encompassable, you can't treat it with one
and radiotherapy field. So in terms of treatment of small cell lung cancer,
chemo and radiotherapy are the primary methods of treatment of small cell lung cancer.
Surgery is very rare because most patients present with advanced disease, bilateral disease, and
--- page 17 ---
metastases. So limited diseases treated by chemotherapy and radiotherapy and extensive disease,
so disease involving both sides of the chest, or metastases, or plural fusions,
are treated palletively with combined chemotherapy. The prognosis is poor and they have a limited
five-year survival rate of about 15 to 25%. And in the extensive group, a two-year survival rate of
only 20%. So it's a very poor prognosis. So in that small cell lung cancer, the three main
modalities used for curative and pallet of treatment include surgery, radiation, and systemic therapies
the systemic therapies can be further broken down into chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and
targeted therapy. The choice of treatment depends on the stage and the patient planters, so whether
the patient is but enough to undergo treatment. Supportive treatment is important for patients
with lung cancer, and this includes a smoking cessation advice and assistance, encouraging a
healthy lifestyle, providing age-appropriate screening for other cancers and psychological
support, and also domiciliary oxygen, so home oxygen, and patients who develop hypoxia from
lung cancer. Patients with early stage and on small cell lung cancer are appropriate candidates
for surgical resection of the tumour, so surgeries are only appropriate for patients whose tumours
can be completely resected, so it must be disease in one lung, and when the tumour is small enough
to either resect a lobe or the entire lung on one side, so they must be limited spread to
local live lymph nodes on the same side as the tumour, and the patient must be fit to tolerate
surgery. Radiotherapy acts by killing cancer cells, by causing direct DNA damage, although
normal cells are also damaged by radiation, they have better repair capabilities and recover
more quickly, whereas cancer cells, because they are mutating and growing so fast, tend to
not recover at all, or not as quickly. Radiation therapy is used after surgery to improve local
tumour control and increase possibility of care. It can also be used for palliative care,
--- page 18 ---
so to improve symptoms and quality of life in patients with stage 3, B and 4 disease who are not
candidates for curative treatment, it's the goal standard combined with chemotherapy for patients
with stage 3 disease, and it can be used endobroncally, so there's a type of treatment called
brachytherapy, where they put a bronchoscope into the airways and then give the radiotherapy
directly to the tumour, and it's been shown to help with symptom palliation for dysneare, for cough,
hematocyst, but there are side effects such as bronchosophageal fistulas. Radotherapy can also
be used to treat brain metastases, to reduce the size of these metastases and gain symptom
control, and it can also be used to treat bone metastases with the goal of decreasing pain
and increasing mobility, preventing pathological factors as palliative treatment.
So chemotherapy, most patients with an unsolicited cell cancer will receive chemotherapy.
Most chemotherapy can be used to shrink a tumour prior to surgery or radiation,
that's known as near-edge event chemotherapy, it can be used to kill cancer cells that will
not remove during surgery to reduce the risk of recurrence and improve the chance of a cure.
It can be used as a primary treatment for those unable to have surgery, so those who have a tumour
that's irisectable due to where it is or who have advanced cancer, it can also be used to
relieve the pain of advanced cancer and it's been used as the mainstay of treatment for
non-small cell lung cancer for decades. For selected stage one and most stage two and three
patients who have completely resected non-small cell lung cancer,
they'll be treated with chemotherapy and then patients with three B and stage four disease are
usually treated with chemo radiation or chemotherapy alone because of their extremely low survival rates.
Recently, there have been developments to treat advanced non-small cell lung cancer,
so stage three and four lung cancers, by using targeted therapies which target specific molecular
--- page 19 ---
mutations in certain non-small cell lung cancer cells to stop growth and stop the spread of cancer
cells. So it's usually given as an option to patients with nodal spread on the testises
and there are multiple different targets of drugs that are available to target different
molecules. Just as an example, there's drugs to target, if you do a more growth factor receptor
and the plastic lymphoma kinase, so that's, oh, breath and rise one, those are commonly mutated
genes which are involved in the pathogenesis of non-small cell lung cancer and targeting
these pathways with inhibitory drugs as resulted in prolonged reparation-free survival for patients
with stage four lung cancer and improved the response rates compared with chemotherapy alone.
And finally, there's a group of drugs which are known as immunotherapy. There
immune checkpoints serve in the body to prevent excessive inflammatory responses and autoimmune
reactions. However, some cancers have taken advantage of this to evade the detection by
the immune system. So there often there is over expression of receptors and inhibitory ligands
by the tumor and these can be targeted by antibodies. Immunotherapy is available for advanced
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer which has stopped responding to chemotherapy or
target therapies or is used in combination with chemotherapy to improve the outcomes.
It can be used to shrink advanced metastatic non-small cell lung cancers for symptom control.
So the prognosis of patients who are diagnosed with lung cancer depends on the stage,
treatment, and we move the cancer, the small cell or non-small lung cancer.
The following is, uh, includes a list of the main factors that
influence the prognosis. Stage is the most important prognostic factor, both small cell
and non-small cell lung cancers. As well as the presence and location of metastases,
the presence of specific markers with targets of therapies which improves the prognosis
--- page 20 ---
because these patients then can access those therapies. Function of the patient at the time of
cancer diagnosis, so if the performance low performance score or the patient's fitness is
low at the time of diagnosis, then they are often eligible for many therapies and that
worsens their prognosis. Sex, so females have slightly better outcomes with non-small cell
lung cancers for males. Sex is associated with a worse prognosis. Weight loss, significant weight
loss prior to diagnosis is associated with worse outcome. Pre-existing land disease is associated
with worse outcome and, um, elevated LDH, hyponatremia, and elevated ALP, which also suggests of
apparently emplastic manifestations and advanced disease with metastases, all such, uh,
indicate worse outcomes. Land cancer overall carries a very poor prognosis. Um, the
average survival for stage four for lung cancer was 11 months a few years ago, but if, if you have
a patient who has a targetable mutation, then prognosis has improved recently with the
development of new targeted therapies, but overall the prognosis on lung cancer in total,
is around 20% of five years survival, so it's a poor prognosis. Thank you for your attention.
