--- page 1 ---
Hello, I'm Dr. Maharaj from the department of pulmonology and let's look just on land
cancer. So land cancer worldwide is the second most commonly diagnosed
cancer and is the leading cause of cancer death for men and women. In South Africa,
land cancer is the third most common cancer in men and the ninth most common
cancer in women. It accounts for 1.8 million deaths worldwide and it's
frequently diagnosed in a third bioin stages of disease which contributes to
low five-year survival rates and a prognosis. It's the leading cause of
preventable death and the leading cause of smoking related mortality. Because of
the prognosis and the low five-year survival rates, there have been efforts
to establish an approach to screen for land cancer in order to diagnose the
disease at an earlier stage where treatment would be more effective. Screening
can be used to detect land cancer in high-risk asymptomatic individuals. The
national land screening trial was a study in which participants were screened
with either low-dose CT or chest X-ray. They were selected by high-risk
criteria so they were between 55 and 74 years of age which is the peak
incidence of land cancer. They were current smokers or smokers who had
quit within the past 50 years and had at least a 30-packer history. The trial
showed a 20% decrease in mortality from land cancer and patients screened with
low-dose CT compared to chest X-ray. So this showed that low-dose CT is
better at detecting land cancer in the early stages in this high-risk
population. The screening information is just for interest and it's not
something that you need to study or need to know.
--- page 2 ---
So cigarette smoking is the most important risk factor associated with
causation of land cancer in up to 90% of cases. It's the number one
modifiable risk factor for land cancer. There are more than 300 chemicals in one
cigarette, 60 of which are known carcinogens. Examples include nitrazamines
and poly aromatic hydrocarbons. These cause DNA damage and mutations within
tumour suppressor genes which interrupt repair and cell cycle regulation
mechanisms and lead to tumour formation. The duration, intensity and age of
onset of smoking influences the risk of land cancer. For patients with similar
peculiar histories, the longer the duration of smoking puts them at greater risk of
cancer compared with a higher intensity of smoking. The risk is highest amongst
current smokers and lowest amongst non-smokers. Persistent smokers have a
16-fold elevated land cancer risk which is further doubled in those who started
smoking younger than 16 years of age. Smoking cessation lowers the risk of
land cancer and should always be recommended. Modern cigarette formulations
do not reduce the risk of developing land cancer but in fact appear to
increase the risk at a no cost no man. The risk of land cancer declines slowly
after smoking cessation. Long-term follow-up studies show that the relative risk
remains high in the first 10 years after smoking cessation and gradually declines
to 2-fold approximately 30 years after cessation. This explains the development
of almost 50% of land cancer cases in past smokers. Strong and cardio respiratory
fitness might help reduce the land cancer risk in cigarette smokers or people who
used to smoke. Many who had higher fitness levels at baseline and measured with a
--- page 3 ---
maximal treat more exercise test had a lower incidence of land cancer during
follow-up and a better survival if they did get land cancer.
Cigarette smoke containing the carcinogenic nitrosamines and aromatic
polycyclic hydrocarbons can be inhaled passively by non-smokers
which is known as second-hand smoke. Urinary levels of these carcinogens and
non-smokers are 1 to 5% of those fun and active smokers and as many as 25% of the
land cancers and persons who do not smoke are believed to be caused by second-hand smoke.
Other risk factors for land cancer include age, gender where male sex is a higher risk for
land cancer, lifestyle factors such as occupational exposures, a diet which is low in
fresh fruit and vegetables and fiber and low physical activity are also associated with increased land
cancer risk. A minority of land cancers develop in people who have never smoked.
These land cancers are genetically distinct from smoking related land cancers and this
distinction may have therapeutic implications. They often have genetic mutations which are
detectable and are amenable to targeted therapy. These cancers have a better prognosis than smoking
related land cancers. A family history of land cancer has been associated with an increased risk
of land cancer development. It's usually about two-fold. Other risk factors for land cancer
include exposure to radon. Radon is an inert gas produced as a result of uranium decay. It's
in our environment, in a household environment but it's a well-established respect for land
cancer in uranium miners and approximately 2 to 3% of land cancers annually are estimated
to be caused by radon exposure. Household exposure to radon however has not been clearly
shown to cause land cancer. As best as exposure, as best as exposure has been shown to be strongly
associated with the causation of land cancer, malignant plural mesohelioma and pulmonary fibrosis.
--- page 4 ---
As best as exposure increases the risk of developing land cancer by as much as five times.
Tobacco smoke and asbestos exposure acts synergistically and the risk of developing land
cancer for persons who currently smoke tobacco and have a history of asbestos exposure
approaches 80 to 90 times that of controlled populations.
In our setting, another important respecter for the development of land cancer is HIV.
Persons with HIV infection have a higher land cancer risk than those without HIV infection.
In people with HIV, land cancer is the most common and the most fatal non-AIDS associated
malignancy. The majority of these are adenocarcinomas, so non-small cell carcinomas.
In most studies the incidence and risk of land cancer in HIV if infected persons did not change
significantly with the introduction of highly active entry retroviral therapy. Land cancer
and HIV infected persons developed almost exclusively in smokers but HIV infection appears
to increase land cancer risk independently of smoking status by a factor of at least 2.5
fold. Compared with land cancer patients in the general population, HIV infected patients with
land cancer are significantly younger. Many patients with HIV infection and land cancer present with
advanced age disease and have a shorter median survival. Other agents that increase your risk
of land cancer are exposure to beryllium, nickel, copper, chromium and cadmium as occupational
exposures, outdoor air pollution, a personal history of lung disease, specifically lung diseases that
scar the lungs including COPD, tuberculosis and certain infections.
Colutants from cooking and heating like biomass, fuel exposure, burning coal indoors, burning wood
indoors, cooking indoors on wood stoves, frying foods and oil at high temperatures.
Dietary fiber and vegetables have been suggested as protective from land cancer although diets
rich in fruit and vegetables appear to be associated with lung cancer. Trials of supplements of
--- page 5 ---
beta-carotene alone or in combination with vitamin E and retinal palmitate and persons at risk of
land cancer found that supplementation with antioxidant vitamins actually increases the incidence of
lung cancer. Another important risk factor is smoking cannabis. Studies are now showing that
long-term cannabis smoking can increase the risk of lung cancer but the evidence is not yet as
robust as for tobacco. Globally, lung cancer trends have followed the trends in smoking with a lag
time of over several decades. Land cancer incidence has been declining in several countries
including the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and other developing countries.
With increased smoking and developing countries, sorry that's other developed countries,
with increased smoking and developing countries the incidence is expected to increase in the next
few years. In South Africa, the incidence of lung cancer is on an upward trend and the
lung cancer incidence among women continues to increase in several parts of the globe including
South Africa. Despite a very low rate of smoking Chinese women have a higher incidence of lung
cancer than European women and also have a higher incidence of genetic mutations causing lung cancer.
Land cancer can be divided into small cell lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer.
Non-small cell lung cancer comes from the majority of lung cancer 85 to 90 percent
and can further be divided into squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma and large cells carcinoma.
So small cell lung cancer carcinoma is though less common off the two. It's usually centrally
located in the chest and it used to be staged as limited or extensive disease. The treatment was
usually with chemo and radiation and it wasn't amenable to surgery because it was often found
at an advanced stage of disease and metastases had often been and had occurred prior to diagnosis.
Non-small cell lung cancer can be centrally or peripherally located. Many are often
peripherally located. They can be fast or slow growing and they're staged using the T&M
--- page 6 ---
staging which is now also applicable to small cell lung cancer and their new treatment which
has improved the survival of non-small cell lung cancer. So non-small cell lung cancer comes
for 85 percent of all cancers and small cell lung cancer 15 percent. Small cell lung cancer
is almost always in smokers. It is characterized by small round blue cells on histologic staining
that are approximately twice the size of lymphocytes. The lesions are usually centrally located
and it's an aggressive tumor that spreads quickly to distant sites. Often distant metastases are
present at the time of diagnosis. It's more responsive than non-small cell lung cancer to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy but despite this the prognosis is still poor. Small cell lung
cancers and non-small cell lung cancers typically behave very differently and as a result the
treatment options and management also differ. Histologically, non-small cell lung cancer can
be divided into adenocosinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and large cell carcinoma. Adenocosinoma
is a count for 35 to 40 percent. They're the most common type overall, the most common type in
women, the most common type in smokers but still most patients are smokers and they're usually
peripheral. So most patients who diagnosed with lung cancer will be diagnosed with lung
adenocosinoma regardless of whether they are smokers or non-smokers. However, if they're
non-smokers they almost certainly have adenocosinoma. So squamous cell carcinoma is an 30 percent of
non-small cell carcinomas. It's strongly associated with smoking. It used to be the most common
histological sub-tab of non-small cell lung cancer but has been overtaken by adenocosinoma.
It's the most common carcinoma to cavitate and it carries a prognosis. It's usually a central
tumour so it's very difficult to resect it because it usually grows into the airway
and very close to the big vessels in the media stanum and the heart. It's difficult to resect
it surgically and so difficult to care. Large cell carcinomas are the least common
--- page 7 ---
type of non-small cell lung cancers. They're usually peripherally located and they're very
large usually one in four centimeters on diagnosis. So how does lung cancer present? Often it presents
with no symptoms in the early stages of the diseases. These patients are often asymptomatic
until the disease is advanced. In approximately 10 percent of cases, lung cancers diagnosed
on a chest x-ray performed incidentally for other reasons. An initial diagnosis, 20 percent of
patients will have localised disease, 25 percent will have regional metastases to local local
structures and lymph nodes and 55 percent so that's the majority of patients have distant
metastases. Many of the signs and symptoms of lung cancer are non-specific and are also seen
in other conditions such as the constitutional symptoms of weight loss, anorexia, blooper,
and nitroids. Cough is the most common symptom of lung cancer and a new
onset of or worsening cough in a smoker or illness smoker should raise the suspicion of
lung cancer. Hematosis, which is coughing up blood, is worrying for lung cancer.
Disneya, patients often present with shortness of breath. Disneya can occur due to the mass
effects of the tumour pressing on the airways so the bronchial trachea can develop when the
tumour induces fluid, so a plural fusion around the lens which causes lancolleps and shortness of
breath. A wheeze can often be heard with or without us consultation if the tumour is presenting
on the lumen of the airways. Chest pain, so pain can develop depending on where the tumour is located.
If there is an invasion outside the lung parent chimer into the plural, ribs, and chest wall,
pain may be present. Chest pain can also be present if the tumour involved lymph nodes are
large in that to press on the surrounding structures. Patients may also present with
horseness of voice and this symptom arises when the tumour compresses the recurrent laryngeal nerve
around the trachea that innovates the vocal cause.
--- page 8 ---
Other symptoms of which patients with lung cancer can present with or late symptoms
are headache, swelling of the face, arms, and neck. This is usually, this constellation of symptoms
can be caused by superior vena cedar syndrome. This occurs when the great vessels entering or
exiting the chest are compressed by a tumour. If it is in the right location and has grown
large enough to exude mass effect, completion of blood vessels carrying venous return to the heart
caused distension and fluid backup resulting in swelling into the region strained by the superior
vena cedar. If a tumour is located at the apex of the lung, the nerves in this area may be
compressed. Pancose tumours or superior sulcus tumours can cause compression of the sympathetic
plexus. When the sympathetic plexus, the nerves of the sympathetic plexus are compressed or invaded.
They can cause hornus syndrome. Hornus syndrome is characterised by meiosis, which is persistently
constricted pupil, ptosis, which is drooping of the pupil, and anhydrasis, which is inability to
sweat on the same side as the tumour. This condition does not cause problems with vision,
and progression of this type of tumour can lead to the involvement of the brachial plexus,
causing arm and hand weakness.
So this is an example of an apical mass in the right upper lobe of the lung, which is compressing
the nerves of the sympathetic plexus.
And this results in drooping off the eyelid and constriction of the people compared to your
normal people in this image in the lower aspect of the side.
So the most common sites for lung cancer to metastasise to your other bones, liver, brain,
and adrenal glands, and when lung cancer is being worked up, investigations looking for
involvement of these sites should be looked for. Bone metastases can present as localised
bone pain, whereas non-traumatic fractures, due to bone weakness. The bones most commonly
--- page 9 ---
affected are the spine, ribs, and pelvis. Jordous, weakness, and weight loss may indicate liver
metastases, and brain metastases have a wide range of presented features, including confusion,
headache, nausea, and vomiting, two personality changes and seizures.
I wanted to talk a bit about the perineoplastic syndromes, which are associated with lung cancer.
Perineoplastic syndromes are important. They occur in 10 to 20% of patients,
and their clinical syndromes that arise not from a direct effect of the tumour, such as
mass effect, invasion, or metastases, but they arise from either an immune response to a tumour,
or the tumour producing substances such as hormones or cytokines that
result in electrolytes, or electrolyte abnormalities, or hormone syndromes.
So the first one that we're going to discuss, so just firstly, most perineoplastic syndromes
are caused by small cell lung cancer, but they may also occur in non-small cell lung cancer,
and hypercalcemia is most commonly found in small cell, in squamous cell carcinoma.
Clubbing and hypertrophic pulmonary osteoporosis, and trisose syndrome of hyperkigulability,
are caused more frequently by adenocarcinomas as well.
SIADH is more common in small cell lung cancer, but can also occur in non-small lung cancer,
and Cushing syndrome is more likely to occur in small cell lung cancer.
So just going into more detail on the perineoplastic syndromes, there are many more, but
we're just discussing the most common perineoplastic syndromes.
So hypercalcemia is one of the more common ones, and it can occur either due to bony metastases,
or to tumour secretion of parathyroid hormone-related peptide or calcitrile. This is usually
released by small cell lung cancers. The clinical manifestations of hypercalcemia are often referred
to as stones, bones, bones, thrones, and psychiatric bones, and this refers to renal
--- page 10 ---
calculi, bone pain, abdominal pain, polyurea, and signs of ultimate mental status.
The common symptoms of hypercalcemia are weakness, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and confusion,
and hypercalcemia is common in lung cancer.
Another perineoplastic manifestation of lung cancer is lambin-eaton syndrome. It's caused by
antibodies against small cell lung cancer. These antibodies, although they're against the lung
cancer, they're very similar to the small cell lung cancer cells are similar to
target similar to the voltage-gated calcium channels, which are situated in motor neurons.
So the antibodies cross-react with these voltage-gated calcium channels,
which damages them and thus leads to weakness in the proximal vessels,
the intraocular muscles. So weakness of the proximal muscles causes just difficulty brushing
more hair or standing up from a seated position. Weakness of the intraocular muscles can cause
a deplopia and ptosis, and then weakness of the pharyngeal muscles can cause slurred speech and
dysphagia. You can also get autonomic dysfunction from damage to these voltage-gated calcium
channels, and that results in a dry mouth, blurred vision, impotence, and dizziness.
So this can occur in 1 to 3% of small cell lun