--- page 11 ---
 on the low is a sipro is a one of the, blue, quennelow.
So sipro is a, you come on as, you know, blue, blue, quennelow, uh, using the hospital, right?
And then, you know, like, as I mentioned, you keep with that, you know, appropriate track
and you always look at it, you are leprosate, and if it's, you know, like, okay, if you
aren't really stable with the sensitive one, you stay carry on.
If you know, like, the one you use is a, you know, like, across the tram end, is coming
back with the, you know, organism sensitive, you can step down.
If you know, like, the one you use is a, the system, you have to step up, so that is a
adjustment space.
It depends, uh, you are hospital, you know, and we're around, right?
And these are the list of the antimicrobial agents, antibiotics for the UTI, you know,
infectious, right?
So mentally asymmetric, you entire phosphomycin, right?
So you always need to know when you examine the patient about complicated UTI or lower,
um, you know, like, you are complicated, UTI, depends on that, you have to choose the appropriate
track.
Five are this concentration dependent drugs are very important because, um, important,
they are two different high dependent, other one is a concentration dependent.
There's a knowledge for you is a thine dependent drugs are the same or synthesis inhibitor,
pita, nate, chanclinicupreptide, right?
That is, say you see, penicillin, amoxic level, and acid, right?
Acapulose, pita, nate, chanclinicupreptide is a vancomycin, right?
Some protein inhibitor is a synthesis inhibitor macrotides, right?
Concentrate is a time dependent mean, and that, um, drugs are, you always use, you know, like
it, and then after some time, the CM level is a, uh, because of that, you retain, you
know, volume to the time, right?
So, some things, drugs are, uh, only, you have to use it, right?
--- page 12 ---
A, uh, only, sometimes, you know, I said, try, sometimes, you know, four hours, something
like that.
Concentration dependent drugs is, uh, mostly, you know, protein inhibitor, amylococric
oxide or quinolone group, uh, because, you know, they, they are there, they're the more
you do, you, you maximize the dose, and cause system, you know, like it that you retain inside
they see that after some time that dose is using tau, right? So, so concentration
dependent is a just once a day, a maniculaco site. So, well, maximum is a
twice a day, that's it, right? So, that is a concentration dependent depends on
that, you know, type of a try, you always need to consider for the half
requests if you have to use it, right? So, how would you choose it? You know,
there are so many, you know, more than 250. So, now this is more than that,
antimicrobial agents. So, how would you choose this? Knowledge based on the
pre-graduation education, now you learn about it, or you know, contents of the
antimicrobial agents. So, the education really scientific approved article, the
relevant for the antimicrobial agents. Information provided by the track company
rep is experienced in his search base, you know, document base, and laboratory
tests, and then locate guidelines, right? Or based on that, you have to choose it.
But you never use a guideline to just find an overseas spot, because over the
expertise that they use, they are all new epidemiological, anti-partum, and
they upload their antibiotic policy. So, that is, you know, good and, you know,
effective for their site. But, you know, you are, you know, your hospital has
another common assay. So, you need to check the, you know, the assessment to
bet them locally, then you have to set up a code there, you know, as you are
a specific guideline. So, even the nationwide guideline, you always need to
be cautioned because you can use it, but you have to modify as your local
assay recently, right? So, this is a, you know, like the laboratory tests, you know,
things. So, yes, six anti-impediatric documentation time, you, I think you, you
--- page 13 ---
can come and visit to the image and the visit, right? So, you can have a look. So,
we can't give it the sensitive or resistant without testing. These are the
tests showing that you deliver the color is sensitive, and you can see the
creamy color is that it is a green of the organism, right? So, green of the
organism and the edge of the, that white is, antibiotic is a service system, right?
And then we have to measure the design manager going to the standard
guide line and see the design guideline, then we can provide the result, right? So,
you want me to worry so much, just for knowledge, I will assure, right? So, now
you choose a, you know, right antibiotics, right? And then, probably, why was the
reasons of the failure? This slide is very important through, after you are
medicated after life, because you treat it and then your patient not, you know,
responded, but then you always need to ask yourself, you know, these questions,
round diagnosis or not, round types of agents or not, round dose or not, round
frequency, round, you know, rule of the administration, pull up a nutrition or
not, use of the endocrine enzyme combination or not, the blooming of the
antimicrobial system or not. These are questions you always need to check, right?
Before you step up or step down for the another antibiotic, right? So, in danger,
the interest is going to use of antimicrobial agents are hypersensitivity,
encephalitis, rash, fever, blood disorder, color, just to have applied,
this color, color, cholesterol, vascular disease, right? Changes in the normal
flora residing from the superinflation, not due to the oobacrol of the
drug system organism, masking the severe infection, or example, abscess, drug
tolerability, the blooming of the drug system and microbial population. These
are the danger of, you know, using of the endocrine enzyme. Antimicrobial agents are
very useful if you use with the optimal choice and generational use, if you
otherwise have been in danger, right? That's why you see always, you know,
check, you know, the questions. So, prophyliasis, one, you know, we discuss
--- page 14 ---
or any, you know, empirical therapy, entire therapy. Now, say,
chemo prophyliasis, indication when you use, you know, antibiotic for the
prophyliasis, risk of the infection is high, and to refine the organism likely to be
the responsible node, agent likely to be active against the organism involved,
narrow spectrum rather than a prospector. That is very important, right? Agent
no use rotating for the treatment that one, you have to choose it for the
prophyliasis, right? So, there, there is, you know,
indication there, medical indications are humectative fever, many
who occur many times, this requires UTI and the area, right? So, that time you
have to use it to chemo prophyliasis. And surgical indications are include
case can green, especially, you know, lower length, amputation, endocalitis,
patient every damage or prostate path with the underlying heart surgery, wound and
other surgical substance, power surgery, now receiving the prosthetic devices. Those
type of the patient you have to use for their prevention, right? So, now, you know,
we are doing for the patient, sick patient with the end, you know, in life
organism, right? So, they are living organism. So, they are also changing, they
are also very clever to protect theirself. So, resistant is a problem, right? So,
the one you choose and the individual, you know, strain, you know, different with
the system, some are the different, some are the system, right? That is a problem, right?
Then you go like a antibiotic, you know, it's a, you can see that discovery in 1940, right?
So, resistant, emerge after some time and they easily separate F1,000 to percent. That is
the papri health issue and crisis because they are resistant to highly morbidity and mortality.
So, so, although, you know, like, you develop a new track that is becoming a system as well,
that is already scientific, right? So, that's why you see, we always need to consider, you know,
like, your system and overuse and improve the usage also, you know, mainly, you know,
to create the system, you know, population, right?
So, that's why, you know, what coming in is the antibiotic relationship, very important, right?
--- page 15 ---
So, actually, you know, look at that definition, it's a more or less same conversation as, you know,
strain, and as optimal usage. So, you can see antimicrobial, antimicrobial stewardship new
prudent use of the antibiotic. So, as to achieve the best patient outcomes, why minimizing the antibiotic
celative pressure, thus reducing the drug resistance, and abiding and
excessively and desirable dose effects, right? So, these are the components of the antimicrobial
stewardship movement. Is it any infection? Is it, you know, collect, you know,
appropriate special sample before the treatment? Initiate the empirical ability after collection
and monitor time to administration, and after the direct ability, and direct, direct, direct
result, and let the result come back, you always need to check the envelope that will be in,
direct ability, right? Is the step-down escalation or, you know, tailor the antibiotic according to
the result, right? So, that is it, you always need to check there 48 to 72 hours, and your
leprosad is, say, D2, D3, so you always need to check, right? If you use antibiotics,
appropriately, after D2 or D3, you are patient clinically stable, right?
And these are the component dose, you know, root frequency. This is all very important, right?
Correctuation therapy, and duplicate, you know, what type of, you know, single drug or
combination therapy, right? That indication I have already mentioned. So, if, if, you know,
not necessarily, you use for the recombination, you can call it a collateral denominational.
So, you're killing the all, you know, sensitive one and create the space for the ecosystem, right?
So, because of that, you don't use it, you combine without the indication, right?
Change from the intravenous, you already, if one appropriate, right? And when, when you use
antibiotic optimization, you always look at the triangle, one is a trap, other one is an organism,
other one is a horse, right? Horse. So, look at that, you know, like,
antimicrobial agents, the one usage is the dose in pharmacokinetic dynamic,
dynamic dependent or, you know, concentration dependent toxicity,
subtle infection, dry interation, all those all you need to know. And the microorganism, also,
whatever the organism mostly, and valueless factors, antimicrobial system, bedtime,
ducts and paraffin production or not, right? Horse, also, you see, what age, you know,
--- page 16 ---
neonate. Let's say, example, your patient is a neonate, so many diets are substance.
What organisms is that you think struck would be hysteria or, or, yeah,
equivalent. All right, these are the neonate stage, you know, the common as well.
So, your many dietists, you need to penetrate amylized. So, at the time, you know that, you know,
the Stevia is a, you know, intrinsic root system to couple scoring. So, you have to
edit the emphasizing, right? Cuffler scoring is a for other equal line and other groupie.
So, you use it, you know, penetrating, you know,
threatening a couple scoring plus, you know, emphasizing for the Stevia. So, those,
thought of the knowledge, you must have it, right? And the weight, body weight is also
important, right? And then, go morbid diseases and the line problem. We have
function, liver, function, and large, you are not right for it. But the other, you know, previous,
you know, source of the infection, something, you know, like a localized infection or all
those things are important to check. So, when you antibiotic optimization, try and get so
important, one is a horse, not patient, other one is antibiotics and Parkinson's, right?
If you know it, you have that knowledge, you are, you can able to choose the appropriate
and, you know, you can optimize the antibiotic and, you know, appropriate antibiotics, right?
Children of the therapies, I have already mentioned that some diseases are
uncomplicated due to 3Ds, right? After the temperature has settled out, you have to stop it. But if
others, you know, like an efficient life staff might succeed. So, if you continue, you know,
like you're voting these 21 days, if you know, like he infected antibiotics, also, you know,
a longer duration, as we do also, longer duration. And from the micro bacteria,
efficient, try, efficient, also longer duration. So, that's my duration of therapy, also very
important. Otherwise, you stop it, you know, before that, that, you know,
data duration, that, efficient, becoming in the labs, right?
So, these are the tracks, you know, first veteran appropriate for the, you know,
organism, right? Thank you, decoy, you know, also for the gram positive. These are second, you know,
a row is a, or drugs are cover for the gram negative, right? These are the, you know,
--- page 17 ---
first row is anti-anaerobic cover, and lower row is anti-fangirl cover, right? This is a new,
you know, slide I added for this year, because these are the, you know, agents are there,
you know, new track, right? New track. So, activity, you know, as I mentioned that although
they're new track upload, if you look at that, you know, different, you know, return resistant
organism, not the hundred percent, you know, susceptibility. You see, that's a problem,
because that's why you always need a micro test, you know, result, right? If, you know,
typically, you know, typically gene detection, because you can see green color is even to green
color, is this a more than 80 percent, not 100 percent, right? So, yeah, the orange color
is that you do 80 percent sensitive for each year, you can have a look, and then red color is
the intrinsic resistance. So, even though you upload a new agent, still you know, like a problematic
right? That's why you always need to do that. Yes. So, intravenous to always switch is likely
patient clinically improving, patient tolerating or a fluid of ease, and appropriate already is
just available at the time you can, you can think from IV to oral, right? Such a prophylaxis, right?
Such a prophylaxis is likely, as I mentioned, prophylaxis is the one within the 12 hours,
otherwise, you know, one date, right? Sometimes one dose, sometimes one date,
that's it. If it is a more than 24 hours, 3 days, 5 days, that is not the prophylaxis,
that is for the treatment, right? So, if it's a such a good prophylaxis,
a such a good transition within that it moves prior to such a good education,
it's a you have to keep it there, you don't like it, and without it. It's not to be better
so to reach out about you, I mentioned already, right? So, when you implement the, you know,
antibiotic stewardship group map, you must have been a team, right? This is a teamwork,
not the individual, right? So, you deal with Ra, you know, like he always audited,
according to all those, you know, the requirement, and before the war, not,
then you analyze the data, and you have to feedback, right? So, whether you,
we achieve the, you know, optimal usage, or which area are caps, and you have to close
the back caps. So, you can see strategies, the blood and your team, and then, you know,
define the rule for each team member, give it the specific responsibility for each team member,
--- page 18 ---
and survey current practice, and send us the strategy to, you know, to execute it,
and the ESP, and Immaculate Stewardship Program, and rule of feedback, and regulation of this.
Otherwise, it's very important, right? There's a strategy. So, as I mentioned,
antimicrobial stewardship is a not only one person can be able to do that. So, you can see
different, you know, teamwork, and some people, you know, pre-authorization restriction. There
is a microbiologist doing it, and then it will issue it from the each unit. Education system,
guideline, and you know, clinical pathway, antimicrobial cycling, combination therapy.
Now, all those things, you know, we have to use it as a strategy, you know, and then analyze also
important, right? This is a, you see, like a bench to patient how to apply. Now, you learn
already empirical therapy, diet therapy, AMALA, and then prophylaxis and other antimicrobial
stewardship recombinant area, and then you know how to, you know, go see the
indications of this analysis you do from bench to patient, right? Firstly, you know, like a
patient present with a disease, AMALA. So, really disease or not, you ask a question.
Then, you know, like you make the clinical diagnosis, and that diagnosis is the infectious
problem or not infectious problem, right? If it is an infectious problem, what are the
commonest, you know, organism for that particular area? Then, you know, you have to collect the
sample and sell to us. If it is a Darius II, it is a UTI, you know, AMALA. If it is a generous
substance, you have to send the blood, right? If you have amenity, you have to sell a CSR, right?
So, so, before you start the empirical therapy, you must have said, collect the sample and send
request to their blood. Then, you know, you started, you know, empirical therapy, right?
Then, you know, like he, in the lab, we do microscopic examination, then gram, you know, result out,
and then gotcha, right, after the gotcha, ID for the organism, and then that ID organism,
we appropriate antimicrobial susceptibility test, we do, right? And then, report to that result,
after D2, so D3, appropriate antibiotic recognition, right? And, appropriate antibiotic sensitivity
return to the clinician. So, in the lab, and in my process of the testing, I have already
showed this diffusion at my CE test, right? This is the same thing like that, right? Same thing.
And then, you know, like a nervous system mechanism is, as I mentioned, you know,
--- page 19 ---
these are the, you know, drug-resistance, you know, and decreased vulnerability,
enzyme, air-debated, auto, talker-side, reflex, all those are, you know, the drug-resistance,
I get with it, right? This is the cellular structure. If it's a community-quiet, you know,
these are the drugs, you know, you have to use it, immobilize, you can see that,
morazela, you know, empressilane, but 90% are resistant to empressilane, and because of
penicillin, it'll be done at the base. In time, there's only a more cyclicality in the acid,
that off-ment, and you have to use it, right? Step only is also, penicillin is 90% resistant
because of penicillin in the base enzyme. So, that's why penicillin is the perpendicular
system, and you do use it, right? And then, you know, penicillin, binary protein, where
is the nervous system mechanism, right? Because this is, um, why is the cross-assarial system
is a chain of the target, you know, penicillin, binary protein, such, right?
So, these are the, you know, like, you, uh, enteropatriacy, GI, systemic infections,
semonella, diaphy, is likely siproal, the generation coupling scoring, right? Because
this empressilane co-tree is a little system, right? And semonella species is a appropriate drug sipro,
and because of ESDL, mostly produce, right? She canize the siproal,
the generation coupling scoring, because empressil co-tree is a little system, right?
So, these are the resistant, mostly, happened, and these are the, you know, like,
empressilane, you can use it, right? If you have colonnae, is it of siproal, you can use it,
because empressilane co-tree is a little micellisist, right? These are the empressica, but
you have to send the sample for siproalic matter. The hospital acquire, as you see, there is
an ESB, a positive equivalent to epsilon, and, you know, empressipro, user, for enterobacter,
you use, you know, like a papyrusum, and osetan, plus amicacin, osetro, or co-pertana, right?
These days, colostin, also, you know, we need to add it here, because some co-pertana,
are resistant, right? And semonella's origin, user, and semirobacter, these are the group,
it's, like, most of the, you know, like, antibiotics, it's, like, if resistant, you always use a,
you know, colostin, right? And steno is a resistant, intransibular system, carbabana,
you have to co-tree your siproal. This is, I have already mentioned, just for the, you know,
--- page 20 ---
somebody for, and with each, right? And MRSE, banko, or, you know, le nozzolate,
and banko my services tent, it will not sell it all, thank you, cycling. And banko my services
and true pockets will not sell it all, thank you, cycling, all right? So, antimicrobial
stewardship management problem is very, very important, because if you, you won't do the
antimicrobial stewardship checking all those empirical, dilute, and prophylases, and, you know,
originally, you know, whatever you choose, that is making the problem for highly, you know,
morbidity or mortality, in future, and no antibody at all, because are you creative, because
and as it's when you use the antimicrobial, it is just created, the system, etc, right? So,
that's why always, always, we need to, you know, force an efficient controllation, and then,
and regard it appropriately after my usage, right? I thought when it's a vaccine, because
the vaccine is, I'm not giving it a duty, vaccine also, you can do that, right? But from there,
you know, some diseases, you know, it's just a fully vaccine available, some are not, because
of the reason, and what's a contemporary version, also very important, right? These are the requests.
So, thank you, and if you have, I think, hope students, you can learn a lot. So,
need it, and you will like it as I mentioned, you have to, you know, like you do the revision
for the classification, the transition, the system mechanism, the system optimization,
right? That is a lack of English, I think. So, hopefully, you know, you, or understand,
look at, ask yourself, you know, before reading, that's,
