--- page 1 ---
Okay, a good day or stress, vacant for my online
lecture notes, that is the optimum use of antibiotics, including the antibiotics
ratio.
This is my contact details and my name.
So I think all of you know me very well, so it's fine.
And when you look at the review contents, these are the lists of the contents if you
want to learn about the antibiotic and antimicrobial therapy.
A green color highlighted lines that you have done already in the ER3.
So you have to do the revision for yourself.
Today, I'm going to focus on the optimum use of antibiotics and antibiotics ratio, right?
So the objectives of the miniature notes, after the end of my lecture, to learn about
the antimicrobial agents is that you have to know about their mode of action and their
mechanism of the resistant, the spectrum of the activity of the antimicrobial agents,
a foundation to the advantage of the usage of the antimicrobial agents, principle of the
laboratory susceptibility testing, optimum use of the including antimicrobial stewardship,
right?
So as I mentioned to you, when you learn about the antimicrobial agents, you have to know
their own functional statement, but today I'm going to focus on the optimum usage and
antimicrobial stewardship, right?
So what is the definition of the end optimum use of the antibiotics?
So this is a cost-effective use of antimicrobial, which maximizes clinical effect, why minimaxing
both a drug-related toxicity and the development of antimicrobial resistance, right?
When you know you know, optimal means the best, right?
So the best thing, you know, like to read the best is there might be change on tomorrow,
because of that reason, you know, like we always need to, you know, look at that, you
know, what is the best option of the antimicrobial agents because we deal with the microorganisms
matter.
So microorganism individual, organism always, you know, they protect themselves.
So when you use the antimicrobial agents, they also protect with the mechanism of their
resistance.
So D by D, you know, resistant, but then are changed.
--- page 2 ---
It might be the same, might be the, you know, different, because of that reason, we always
need to review there, you know, indication for which antimicrobial drugs are used, right?
So this is very important.
And then another thing is the, you know, when you learn about the optimal use, you basically
you have to know about, they have three forms of the antimicrobial drug use.
One is the empirical therapy, other one is the diet therapy, other one is the, you know,
chemotherapy for prevention of their infections, right?
So firstly, you know, empirical therapy means is that the best possible drug uses of the
etiologic pathogens has been made on the basis of clinical and laboratory information available
to the physician.
And there is the empirical use of antimicrobial agents in patients with normal differences.
That is the individual with normal, why it's called adequate immunoglobulin and functioning
complement.
And there is empirical using immunocompromised patients, so the later patient may be immunocompromised
either by disease or by the treatment.
So what I mean, that is saying, you know, when you use the empirical therapy, it depends
on the individual and their immune system, defense is the intake of compromise, right?
So that's why when you visit today, you know, well, to the different unit like normal, you
know, a medical unit and a new, you know, condition separates like an oncology unit,
hematology unit, you know, when you see the antibiotic policy for the empirical therapy,
they are different, right?
Because if immune system intake, you don't need to think so much about it, a lot of organisms
that can cause the infections, right?
If it is, you know, like the individual patient chronic condition of the patient and oncology
patient example, and immunosuppress condition for the, you know, hematology unit.
So that have a group of the patient when you use the empirical therapy, you always think
about the, you know, prospect training because most of the, any, you know, pathogen easily
susceptible for the type of immunocompromised suppressive patient, right?
And another, you know, option is the type therapy, you know, type therapy, me, that is based
on the laboratory research, right?
So you collect the samples and you send to the request, IG identification susceptibility
--- page 3 ---
reset for the, that's sent sample.
And after D2 or T3, you will receive back the, you know, IG, me, name of the organism and
the accessibility data.
So based on that, you always need to check empirical therapy and, you know, data therapy
and you have to adjust, right?
So at that time, you know, like he, in the lab, as you, as I mentioned, you know, like
he, when you receive the sample, you know, you have to do the gram stay in culture and,
you know, susceptible, IDS, susceptible testing, right?
So always, you know, the micro lab is important to determine the specific name of the organism
and they are susceptible to the receptor, right?
Then collaboration between the physician or specific, you know, the clinicians and lab
pathologists and then we decide to treat, you know, that empirical therapy is a, doesn't
need to change, because of sensitive or otherwise, you know, like you need to change step up
or step up, right?
And then, you know, other one is, you know, as I mentioned, prevention of the infectious,
right?
So, example, any type of the surgical procedure, you know, at the time, you know, like he,
when you're doing the physician, maybe skin flora is can have a chance to invade to the
physician side, right?
And otherwise, you know, like he was a potential wound or something, fasting of the, and if
they're doing a cavity and, you know, like you, you have to fix up.
So at that time, also a lot of organisms are, at least from the large intestine to the
prey to the cavity causing the prey to matter.
So if you're not using the antimicrobial, even as well, prevention, and you can describe
the infectious, that at that time, you need to prevent the infection using the antibiotics.
So you, you, please, you know, I have to remind all of you, please read about the classification
of the antibiotics mechanism of action and the system as patron of the identity cover
for, you know, antimicrobial agents, that is, you have done already, right?
So you have to recheck.
So because my lecture is without knowing all those, you know, topics, you know, you
don't understand, right?
--- page 4 ---
So this is a basic, you know, antimicrobial agent.
So you have to reach.
What is the most appropriate track, right?
So when you choose the appropriate antimicrobial agents, you have to consider that antibiotics
must be support the sensitive process.
So what is the name of the selected process?
So that toxicity means you have to only target, you know, toxicity to the, you know, the specific
temperature, not, you know, toss it to the USA as much as we could.
That's why you see we only need, we want to send a definite toxicity to the targeted,
you know, pathogen, right?
So other, you know, attribute is a, you know, you always need to ask, like, energy or not,
and the one you choose the antibiotic is, you know, relevant spectrum of the activity
or not, penetrate world to the tissue example, you know, you treat the patient with a minute
itis.
So you, you, you are targeted, side is in the ninjas, right?
So that time you are the one who choose their antimicrobial agents, example that generation
cup was for you.
That is a can equal to penetrate to the blood ring barrier, right?
So have infrequent deployment of the resistance.
So this is also very important example TV, TV, you always use a combined therapy on the
right.
So because, you know, if you use the only one track, you know, frequently deployment of
the resistance, that's why combined therapy for the anti-TV, right?
And the characteristic of the best antimicrobial agents are SRO, that is, you know, virtually
activity must be the sensitive and proven efficacy for the clinical condition, but
tram is you have to choose narrow as possible, distribution as restricted as possible, example,
you know, like, if you want to treat at the, that abdomen aside, let's see, the time you
are drug mustn't, you know, penetrate to the, you know, like you, the brain, your head
ex, via head excite.
So if, you know, you know, restricted with that, you know, distribution, you might have
a side effect, like a severe headache, you don't want that, right?
--- page 5 ---
So some, some trucks are, you know, okay, killing the pathogen from the same side, but
if the doses are due to the liver or the doses due to the kidney, we know function, that
is also we don't want, right?
That's why we always need to consider for the restricted as possible.
So if it also limited as possible, to see schedule or simple as possible, we don't want
to use it, you know, full-time spotty rather than, you know, like you, if possible, you
know, if using one, one city, a maximum generosity, right?
But the most you have at frequently scheduled sometime, you forgotten, right?
And patient also, you know, like you compliance, you say, sometime more than three times, they
don't.
Because of that, it was a schedule also, if you're available, you have to choose a simple
cheapest possible.
There is a bottom-up that you are characteristic of the best agent, but, you know, like, if
possible, the cheapest one you have to choose it.
When do we try to achieve with the antimicrobial treatment?
Clinical and microbiology get cure, avoidance of the side effect, avoidance of the diploma
resistant, that three is very important when you choose the antimicrobial agents, right?
And how do you choose the track?
So general principle of, you know, antimicrobial therapy, before starting the antimicrobial
therapy, the following question is to be taken in consideration, one is a clinical consideration.
So what are these evidence of the infection, right?
The patient has a really efficient or not, an efficient, likely, and likely to respond
the treatment, and how urgent treatment you need, and are these any features of the book
device, an efficient or not, and relevance the cement before the treatment, also you
have to collect, right?
Micropathologically considerations are what are the likely pathogens, right?
Example, you know, you got to sleep a coffin, right, so pneumonia.
So that's how, you know, you have to think, a coffin, a barrel spirit is a fluency, a strip
nume, right?
People like you say you got a diary or something, you always think they're GI, a pathogen, like
you say, a monolashigella, something like that, right?
--- page 6 ---
Are these any epidemiology clues?
But you got a fever or cough or something, example, like a COVID-19, everybody knows
that, that period, 2021, and the pandemic for COVID.
So you always need to, firstly, exclude the COVID-19, that's why the flu is also important
to start there, and the micro-regions.
And the other one is the pharmaceutical situation, so antibiotic susceptibility is very important.
You have to use, you know, like uvation or therapy, and look for antibiotic policies,
and, you know, narrow spectrum, and single track, right?
And combination track is, you must have some indication, otherwise, you always use a single
track, and other consideration pharmacological consideration, and as I mentioned already,
you know, that antibiotic is the website of the infection be reached, and that's
clearly the monitoring, right?
Because as I mentioned, some track, they use example amino blackboard side of vancomycin,
it's the FAA, rinodocicity, right?
So at that time, you always monitor the rinofencium, and then see, you know, you know, drugs
and other one, right?
And what to reach out to the treatment require also very important, because example, you
know, you know, it's a 3 to 5 days of the appropriate track, if it's a TB, it's a long
observation.
Am I?
If it's that spectococcus bloodstream, it's also, you know, like a longer duration of
14 days or 21 days, right?
So this is a, you know, look at that on showing that example of the, you know, 2013 common,
you know, resistant that TB has, you know, mentioned that, you know, you can learn different
type of the organism of the drug resistant organics, the consistent we have in each month.
So that's as you can learn, right?
You don't need to worry about the old distance for this slide.
You have to understand, you say, you know, long ago, last 10 years ago, six, nine, 10
years ago, you know, like they, they were drug resistant organisms, of course, in, you
know, in each month, right?
And when you look at the 2017, also similarly, increasing after resistant organics are there,
--- page 7 ---
you see, you know, like a MDR pseudo, the mandatory resistant, as in due back to ESB,
above the E.Koda, ESB, positive eclipse, you know, co-opener resistant, and rubatic
disease, MRSC and others.
So endemic condition in the hospital, right, again, in the hospital, there's not only
in key certain, most of the, you know, private hospital, other, you know, brought this hospital
also, they had, you know, consistent, you have the injury resistant challenging, right?
Look at that, you know, like, you know, 2011, 2011, also, you know, this organism, as in
rubatic disease challenging organism, because that organism is not always happening to the,
you know, septicemia, sometimes just colonized, you can see that, you know, red color is just
for septicemia, meaning that that organism goes into infection, some, you know, amount
of the organism is just colonized, right?
So we don't treat, we are not treating, we are not treating to the colonized, as in
due back to isolate, we are treating to the patient with the dead organism as a subspatia,
right?
So look at that, you know, like, challenging, even though, you know, as in due back to,
it's like, commonly, you know, imagine that it's a colonizer, but stay challenging in
terms of management, and I'll break it, because that is simply how that is said, you can see
that, compared with the 2021-2022, you know, like, you remember of the isolate, you know,
reducing tau, 21-22 is reducing tau, but in terms of proportion of the MTR is like, you
can see that, you know, like, in 2022, we are more resistant, right?
Although number of the acids are high in 2021, and by 2022, we issue all the carers system,
versus the sensitive is, you know, higher, you know, 72%, right?
And you know, like, we are always at the, because of that, we say we are checking the
system button in Ishaia, you know, every year, because, you know, like, changing, right?
So Aztec group is an enterococcus, can I pause it, it is enterococcus, see that as
in due back to pseudo-monus, and enter back to visa, the Aztec group, darkening, you know,
to do the severance.
So why severance?
We need to push up, you know, what, you know, resistance pattern occurs in your specific
unit or hospital, right?
So that, now, resistance is a image, and we always think about the, how would you manage?
--- page 8 ---
Now, before that, you always need to understand, you know, how you prevent the resistance.
So combination therapy is, you know, certain cases, indications you need to understand,
the one is, you know, to increase the spectrum of the cover.
So, example, you know, you got a misinficience or intra-abdominal substance or infections,
and you need, you tend to use only single-track, right, we combine therapy.
And to achieve synergistic effect, right, in fact, the endocardial discontinue, synergy
means, what is meaning that?
One effect of the, one single drug has another combined track.
So we want to do more effectiveness, that's why we combine, right?
And then to reduce the likelihood of the emergence of process, I mean, again, the dB-suumulus
infections, I would only use a combined track, right?
But in terms of, you know, civil infection, you say, to partial, some people saying that
same care is fine, some people saying they combine to the PC, but it depends on the individual
case, right?
And severity of the infections, we have to decide, right, depends on the side of the
infections, and depends on the PC clinical condition.
To reduce the dosage of the potential toxic track, is an example of the focus on anxieties.
If you use those single-track, you move your high dose, and then you can have a toxic effect.
Now, if you combine, adjust the unit back to different, you know, track dosage, no dosage,
so you can get the unit back signal, okay?
So this is a step in choose and the antibiotic, and the antibiotic track.
So if no infection, no antibiotics, if there's an infection, you ask a question slide that
and don't choose an antibiotic, right?
So in terms of community and hospitable infections, also different, you know, drugs you have to
use.
A definition of the community infections, new infection time use before or within the
24, 48 hours, not 24 hours, not the 72 hours, 48 hours of the hospitalization, and not
the regular contact with the health system, chronic illness, right?
That is, you know, community-acquired infection.
If a hospital-acquired infections may infection time use after 48 hours of the hospitalization
or regular contact with the health system, right?
--- page 9 ---
So these are hospital-acquired infections.
And microbes to consider in community and hospital-acquired infections, you can see that in community
-acquired is mostly a very sensitive, you know, organism, and hospital-acquired is mostly
including their travel system, right?
If you know just the one hospitalization, you might have a sensitive track, but if you
do like, for bi, it's a resistant, and you do like sensitive track, organisms are causing
them, both, you know, causing their hospital-acquired infections, right?
So what does it mean that these days are very difficult to differentiate based on the
drug data?
Some majority of their cases in hospital-acquired is a dangerous system, right?
But we can see sometimes, you know, a drug-resistant organelle coming already, you know, a prior,
you know, at the community level, because these days, you know, you are students or doctors
so, you know, they charge patients, you know, with the organelle-resistant organism and
go to there, you know, your home.
That's why you see, you always need to follow the infection control mission, right?
If otherwise, you're taking with the drug-resistant organism to home and then acquire today, and
you are a family member who, you know, you are all who susceptible, you know, like to
chronic conditions.
So that's why you see, like, we can see all the time, commonly acquired is always
as a different life, that is, but the majority of the organisms from the government are sensitive
and majority of their hospital-acquired pathogens are must be another system, right?
So, if you see, you know, susceptibility pattern, community, and, you know, hospital
organism is, you know, like, you can see that medicinal-resistant and other, you know,
it's typical, it's typical, these are all other, you know, like, you can see it's typical,
it's typical might be the hospital-acquired, might be the common-gy choir.
The MRS is a must be hospital-acquired, but some, too, also, you know, like a community-acquired,
right?
ESB-approved users are mostly from the hospital-acquired, but these days are, as I mentioned
to you, you can get the, you know, resistant organisms from the community as well, right?
So, these are additional hospital-associated bacteria, it's a likely, as individual, bacterial
species, and multi-drug-resistant organism, and you always need to differentiate to the
--- page 10 ---
colonized or, you know, it's going to be significant, right?
Other one is genotrophomonas medophilia, that organism are intensively resistant to carbon
and because carbon and produce, you know, produce and that organism, because there is
a carbon and is a picker for a spectra, but exceptional, right?
For this, you know, it doesn't, you know, cannot be key behind it, carbon and all, right?
VRE is a vancomizable system, antrocockospicules of VZM, and MDM and multi-drug-resistant
psilomonas originosa, carabiner-resistant, ABAR-GMB, gram-negative bacteria, these are
the mostly majority of the, all those things are from the hospital, so you see the infectious,
right?
So, empirical therapy, when you choose, you have to know the epidemiological record of
the antibiotic, you know, any background, right?
Thank you, like, if it's a commonly acquired, and when you plot the patient, you know the
situation, you know, how many days with the sick, so that time, you always differentiate
commonly acquired hospital acquire, so if it's a commonly acquired, you can use the
penicillin and penicillin, or go, I mean, go, I'm also going to ask it, right?
If it's a hospital acquire, the penicillin doesn't bother them with the amigasin or carabiner,
right?
That, as you go across the end, the penicillin doesn't have a difference, it's a pseudomonas,
your pseudomonas is a, you know, mostly hospital acquired in the pathology, right?
And, you know, pseudocanopitry with the comosin, right?
That's why hospital acquire is a dead class of the time, right?
So, okay.
These are the, you know, like, appropriate transverse end problem, bacteria, MRC, appropriate
track, concomacy and an oscillate, ESP-approved user, the penicillin doesn't bother with the
amigasin or penicillin or carabiner, pseudomonas origin user, you can try with the penicillin
or cactus routine with the mni, minor glycoside, otherwise, siproflosissin or your carabiner.
These are the disulfore, they, appropriate for the, uh, pseudo, right?
Stenotofomonas, as I mentioned, are interested in the system to carabiner, and so you can
choose co-tree or blue, blue, blue, quennelow or siproflosissin, right?
Look