--- page 1 ---
Three, two, one. So today we're going to be looking at superative lung syndromes focusing
on bronchiectasis, lung absists, and ampaima. Looking at a brief overview of this presentation.
With regards to bronchiectasis, we'll be focusing on the definition, looking a little
bit at the pathology, various etiologies, the clinical picture, investigations and treatment.
With lung absists, it will be a very similar overview as well as for ampaima. So what is
bronchiectasis? Bronchiectasis is the abnormal, permanent dilatation of medium and small
bronchial trees, and it may be focal, or it may be diffuse. So what is the actual
pathology that results in this? So you end up with trans-mural inflammation and destruction
in predominantly the walls of the medium-sized bronchi. They result in mucosal edema. And this
area of inflammation, the cartilage, muscle, elastic tissue are replaced by fibrous tissue.
The mucus glands there is hyperplasia with impaired mucosalili clearance. And because of this,
you end up with recurrent bacterial infections. There's also an increase in vascularity of the
bronchial wall which develops, which we know in term neurovascularization. And due to this,
there is a risk of hemaptasis. So who is susceptible to get bronchiectasis? So it develops for several
factors. So one is repeated infective insults. There could be airway obstruction, example from
like a foreign body or lymph node. And then there could be reasons for having reduced clearance of
mucus or other materials in the airway. And then lastly, there may be a defect in the host immune
defense system. So you end up with an infection which results in bacterial toxins with an immune
response. So for example, if a patient ends up with a pseudomonas pneumonia or a hemophilus
influenza pneumonia or a staph aureus pneumonia, you get the production of proteases, which is the
bacterial toxin. And this results in destruction of the bronchial walls. So with repetitive insults,
you get repetitive destruction of the bronchial walls. The host then institutes an inflammatory
response to the toxins. And you end up with mediators and oxygen free radicals, which results in more
destruction. Eventually, the airways become colonized with these bacteria, which can result in ongoing
destructive changes, as well as in ongoing inflammatory response. Specifically for TB with the mechanism
--- page 2 ---
here, it causes a necrotizing effect on the lung parenchimer and the airways. And it can also result
in area obstruction by fibrosis or with lymph node enlargement. So the further mechanism is that of an
impaired host defense, which we had spoken about. And this can be a result of an endobronchial
obstruction, which is longstanding lymph node or foreign body obstruction. And then immunoglobulin
deficiencies, which are either congenital or acquired, or as mentioned, impaired in silary
function, which results in impaired mucus secretion in patients such as cartagners or in cystic
fibrosis. So looking more closely at the actual etiologies, with regards to airway obstructive
causes, you can get innate causes and acquired causes. So example of some innate causes include
things like bronchomylicia or trichobronchomegalae. Some acquired causes could be things such as
foreign body aspiration, especially in children, or highly adenopathy in patients with tuberculosis
or sarcoidosis. Some causes that as a result of defect in the host defense. So as mentioned here,
your innate or congenital immunoglobulin deficiencies, such as an IgA deficiency or like IgG deficiency,
and then you get acquired deficiencies in patients with example for HIV or chronic malnutrition.
Then your causes resulted from impaired drainage are things like cystic fibrosis or cartagners,
which was mentioned. Cartagners remember the triad of cytosinverters, chronic sinusitis,
as well as bronchiectasis. And this X-ray gives a good picture of a patient with
dextrocardia, as well as you can see in the airways, there's evidence of bronchiectasis.
On the other examples, that could be causes secondary to things like connective tissue disease,
like rheumatoid arthritis or showgrines. Patients could have alpha-1 endotrubsin deficiency,
as well as chronic infections from childhood, such as pertussis, bacterial pneumonia, or current TB.
So how do these patients present? Well, on history, they'll often present with a recurrent
cough of very productive, profuse, purine, and sofalsmenin sputum. And a large majority of the
patients actually do present with hematosis. And this is due to bleeding through the friable
mucosa or hypertrophyid bronchial arteries. They will also give a complaint of dyspnea,
or they may have a history of wheeze due to associated bronchoconstriction of an airway.
--- page 3 ---
Technically, scientists pick up with that of clubbing, and on respiratory exam,
they would have a significant accrepitation, so usually cause crepitations, as a result of the
surrounding fibrosis and secretions within the airway.
Okay, they may also present with a complication of the bronchiectasis itself. So in general,
complications include, we've mentioned hematosis, but they may also present with septicemia or septic
shock, or amyloid doses. And then in the chest, specifically, they may have complicated with
lung abscess, ampaima, or they may have features of co-pammonale with heart failure.
Okay, so the diagnosis for the purpose of evaluation is one to get radiographic
confirmation, then to identify if there's a potential treatable cause as a cause for bronchiectasis,
and then to do a functional assessment of your patient. So the initial evaluation is to do
a thorough history focused on the respiratory history, and then to do an examination.
We do specific laboratory testing and then imaging, which I will discuss in more detail
in the future further slides. So baseline laboratory testing initially, we would look at a full blood
cloud, as well as some inflammatory markers to rule out any infection. And then we would direct
our investigation to ruling out specifically, pneumonias, looking at sputum cultures, as well as
excluding tuberculosis. So we do microscopy culture and sensitivity on the sputum, as well as a TB
culture and gene expert. And then the further directed laboratory investigation is looking at
specific causes. So your immunoglobutins will be looked at to look if there was some kind of
immunodeficiency that the patient has, as mentioned, you would also do HIV testing,
and then autoimmune screens as well. So on the imaging, the chest x-ray gives you a typical
honeycomb appearance, which could be unilateral or bilateral. And then further imaging is required
as well. So we diagnose it on CT imaging, where there is noted to be airway dilatation with lack
of airway tapering toward the periphery. We would also note bronchial wall thickenin,
which appears very close like in appearance of the bronchioles, or it may be cystic like
what we term cystic bronchiectasis, which is noted at the end of the bronchus. An echocardiogram
--- page 4 ---
is also noted to look for right heart strain or involvement. So we look at right heart
dilatation, and we check the pulmonary pressures as well for pulmonary hypertension.
Okay, so this is an x-ray where you can see these dilated airways
and thickenin of the airway walls, which is noted here, typical honeycomb in picture,
and then this is just an irregular opacity of a provident mux plaque area.
So on CT, as mentioned, there's the lack of tapering of the bronchioles,
as well as airway dilatation, and then also of note, you can see thickenin of the bronchiol wall
and cystic formation. So there's many cysts, which is one of cystic bronchiectasis.
So two typical signs which are often mentioned in textbooks is the signet ring sign over here,
and then we also talk about the tram track sign. As you can see, the airways are elongated
and dilated, almost like a tram track.
The primary function tests give you an obstructive picture, usually with a normal
force vital capacity, so they would be a reduced FEV1, as well as a reduced FEV1 over FVC ratio.
If there is the presence of a very low FEC force vital capacity, then it's usually an advanced
disease in which a lot of the lung has been destroyed and has become fibrotic.
Okay, so just as an overview of the workup, so it's an appropriate clinical scenario.
So this is based on history and clinical findings. You would go on to further investigate this
patient initially with chest x-ray, lung function, and sputamininosis to exclude active infection.
Further imaging is required in the form of a high resolution CT scan,
and if this is normal, then you would need to look for other causes for the patient's
clinical presentation, but if it's abnormal, you would look on the CT, are we talking about
focal bronchiectasis, or are we talking about diffuse bronchiectasis involving bilateral
lung involvement, and then based on that, you would narrow down your investigations depending.
So what are the goals for treatment?
So the goal for treatment is to treat the infections early, especially during exacerbations.
--- page 5 ---
So we need to identify infections early and treat them aggressively.
We want to improve airway clearance, we want to reduce inflammation, and if possible, and
there is an underlying identifiable cause for the bronchiectasis, we want to treat this.
So antibiotics are used only during acute episodes, which need to be early identified as mentioned.
Therapy should be directed on the culture and the sensitivity, however, we often do start
empiric coverage, generally with antibiotics such as augmented together with azithromycin.
So infection with pseudomonas is of particular concern as it appears to be associated with
the greater rate of deterioration of lung functions.
Very importantly is these patients, we need to be able to facilitate drainage.
So there's mechanical methods as well as devices such as oscillatory devices which can be used
in order to help loosen up the mucus and aid with drainage or expulsion of it.
So physiotherapy is often really important in training these patients on good methods in
order to facilitate appropriate drainage of their sputum. And the use of mucalytic is very
controversial, and bronchitis are given to improve the obstruction and also aid with clearance
of the secretion in many of these patients. Surgery can be offered to patients specifically
if they have localized disease or if they've had a poor response to medical treatment.
Surgery can also be offered if they spoke of bronchiectasis with approximate
airway obstruction that needs to be relieved. And then it's also used in patients with
massive hematosis such as bronchial artery embolization. Some general measures for all
patients who present with bronchiectasis is that if they smoke, they need to be
secession of smoking. They should be vaccinated against pneumococcal. They should get annual
flu vaccines as well as vaccination against COVID. And if the indication for dormacillary
oxygen is there, they should be provided with oxygen therapy.
Just a quick overview on cystic fibrosis. So cystic fibrosis, so we know this is a problem with
mucocillary clearance. And these patients develop bronchiectasis. So it's an autosomal recessive
--- page 6 ---
disease. The mutation is on the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator on chromosome seven.
And the problem is with the chloride channels, which have a very developed very
viscoid. So it's the chloride channels with a problem. So they end up with very viscoid
thick secretions, which is anitis for the binding of bacteria in the airway and proliferation of
this bacteria, which results in the current infections. So it involves many systems in the lungs,
it results in bronchiectasis, in your upper respiratory check, in your sinuses,
it results in chronic sinusitis with nasal polyposis. In men, it results in infertility due to
with the sperm immobility, and motility is reduced. With the exokine brancurious,
they end up with pancreatic insufficiencies. There's a problem with protein and fat malabsorption.
And with the endocrine pancreas, they end up with diabetes and liver cirrhosis is also as a result
of the cystic fibrosis. The next part of our talk is on lung abscess. So lung abscess is an
infection of the lung parenchyma consisting of one or more necrotic inflammatory cavities
that contain fibo-plurulent exudates. So here we can see on x-ray that there is a cavity
noted in the left upper lobe, and you can note the air fluid level within this cavity. So it's
highly suggestive of a lung abscess. So causes for lung abscess include high risk for aspiration
pneumonias, and these are in patients with seizures, or coma, or patients with neurological disease,
so vulber or pseudo-bulbopausees. Another is fact is bronchial obstruction in malignancy.
They could be septic emboli from patients with like infected endocarditis or prosthesis.
They could be direct spread from the subfrenic region or from the hepatic abscess,
and then a complication of pneumonias, especially pneumonias such as staph aureus,
klepsienna, or pseudomonas. So this particularly pertains to patients with aspiration risk and
the positioning that they line in. So if you have a patient who is lying supine, so that's face up,
the aspiration often occurs in the superior segment of the lower lobe on the
superior segment of the lower lobe, and if a patient is lying prone, or if they're lying on
their side, aspiration occurs in the posterior segment of the abdomen.
--- page 7 ---
Like septic emboli, like infected endocarditis, or if you look specifically on x-ray and there's
an apical abscess, you have to think about tuberculosis. We then undertake sputimal analysis here too,
particularly looking for things like oral anoropes, because as mentioned, aspiration is a risk factor
for lung abscess. And then other organisms like staph aureus, streptococcus, pneumonia,
an aerobic grand narrative, the celli or TB must also be looked for.
So on this chest x-ray, you can note there's actually multiple cavitatri lesions which are noted.
There's multiple lesions and some with air fluid levels and some without.
And this is also a CT scan showing significant cavitatri lesions with air fluid levels within it.
And this is another CT image of a patient with a left upper lobe lung abscess,
which is distilled to the bronchocastinoma of the left high limb.
Okay, this picture just depicts a patient who has aspirated and they actually ended up
aspirating one of their teeth, which was loose. So this is an aspirate, a patient was aspirated
a tooth and this is now obviously a nidus or the development of a lung abscess.
So antibiotic treatment, the drugs are geared towards anorope, anorope. So we look at things
like metronidazole or klinamycin or combinations of such as well as carbapenums. And then you have
to always assess whether there has been an appropriate or poor response to the antibiotics
which are prescribed. So looking at things like is the bacteriological diagnosis correct? Was the
drug and dosage correct? And has the lung abscess further complicated? So is there now
empaima or is there a bronchopluorofystula which is developed? Is there surrounding
atelectasis of the lung abscess? So is there possibly a poorly ventilated
lobule? Does the host have a poor immunity or is the duration of treatment too short?
And so at that point, if they're not really responding well to oral antibiotic treatment,
the lung abscess would need a postural drainage or bronchoscopic drainage and some general measures
which will give to these patients who are generally quite toxic on admission is
pain relief with analgesia and antibiotics. So the indications for surgery would include
--- page 8 ---
a massive hematosis which might develop if the patient is refractory to medical treatment. So as
mentioned, no improvement on oral antibiotics. If it's a very large cavity with thick walls,
if it's complicated by a malignancy, so the development of a complication like empaima,
if it's a recurrent chronic lung abscess or after treatment completion, if there's any
remaining residual cavity. So some of the complications of lung abscess include an empaima,
so with or without a bronchopluorofystula, there may be spillover or pass from a very large
abscess. You might get systemic septicemia or spray to other sites. They could be the development
of brain or other metastatic abscesses, severe hemorrhage or as mentioned,
hematosis is an indication for surgery. An chronic lung abscess, chronic bronchitis,
localized emphysema or bronchiectasis may also be present. And then last year,
complication of amyloidosis. Okay. So the last part of our talk is on empaima.
So empaima is a purulent exudative plural effusion, which is secondary to a pneumonia or
lung abscess or bronchiectasis, which you've seen from the previous parts of this talk.
Respectors here include patients who are of a more advanced age or pneumonias or recurrent
pneumonias in patients, patients with an alcohol or drug history, diabetes, patients with
poorly controlled gastrointestinal reflux disease, those with poor oral hygiene,
who are immunosuppressive or have had previous plural intervention.
So these patients also present as quite ill toxic looking patients with associated fever
and parrotic chest pain. There may be an increased in sputum production,
and they may give you an history of being known with bronchiectasis having a previous lung abscess
recurrent pneumonias or previous pulmonary TB. So chest examination will often show a
mere spinal shift, so that with tracheal deviation to the contralateral side to where the empaima
is located, there would be stony downness to percussion and reduced breath sounds.
So the pathophysiology of empaima is that it starts with as an exudative process,
which then develops into a fibronome purulent stage, and then you end up with an organizing
--- page 9 ---
stage thereafter. And the duration for this is the exudative space is usually around about
two weeks or so, and the fibronome purulent stage is quite a long duration. It can be anything
between a week to six weeks, and then the organizing stage is generally two weeks thereafter.
Okay, so the exudative stage is what we often refer to as the perineumonic diffusion, which
is associated with an ammonia. So you end up with the bacteria, it invades into the lung
parenchymone, you get parenchymone, so you get the pneumonia, and then the parenchymone
inflammation leads to visceral choral membrane permeability to be reduced, and then you get leakage
of the interstitial fluid into the plural space. Then this results in a high level of
endogenous fibrolytic enzymes, and you get anatomical distortion, which occurs, which leads to an
increased amount of fluid, so your plural fusion basically. At this stage, you have a normal pH
and a normal glucose with a negative culture, and it's important to recognize this early and
treated early, so it actually doesn't progress into the fibropurulent stage, which is the next
phase. And this is when the bacteria actually transcends into the plural membrane, and you get
progressive leukocytosis and thrombronocumulation at the plural surfaces, and then there's a progressive
tendency towards locculation. The bacterial and neutrophil have phagocytic activity, and they use
up the glucose, and they produce lactate. And at this point, the LDH starts to rise in the
fusion, and you get a release of polymorphs and polynuclear cells. So during the organizing stage,
the fibrobras grow into the plural space, and you get formation here of an inelastic membrane.
Pated-derived growth factor and transforming growth factor beta can lead to plural fibrosis,
you get plural thickenin, which inhibits the bacterial penetration even further,
so it can't appropriately treat the infection, and then you get a microbiome bioformal occurs,
also reducing the antibiotic effectiveness. And the collagen deposition in this phase reduces
the effectiveness of fibrobrenolisis, and that's when surgery actually becomes quite essential and
inevitable at this stage. Okay, so the investigations for Impayima also here is a baseline chest x-ray,
which would be able to see quite significant fluid, or in this case here, there's almost a
--- page 10 ---
complete whiteout on the right side, on the right lung, and if you know the significant
tracheal deviation here towards the contralateral side, and then you would have to do fluid aspiration
of the of the of the of the fusion. So looking at lights criteria, they will, it will be an
exudated fusion that's present, and also to notice that the glucose would be low, and the pH would
be less than 7.2, which is diagnostic of an Impayima. Looking at the cell count,
there would be a predominance of white cells, so a neutral predominant, and if it's a lymphocyte
predominant, you would have to think about a TB Impayima. So the aims of treatment is to control
the infection, and also allow for re-expansion of the lung. So antibiotic therapy here,
often klindomizing, or given together with a metronidosol or rassifenin metronidosol,
for a prolonged duration of treatment two to six weeks, and then obviously directed therapy
if an organism is cultured. Intercostal drainage is the treatment delity of choice for an Impayima,
because it's possible in the plural space. So drainage via normal plural synthesis
will not be sufficient to drain out that fluid. So an intercostal drain is what is used,
and if it's neglected, it will end up with lockulation, and then it is very difficult to treat.
Interpural thrombolytic therapy to dissolve the fumbrin and prevent lockulation and adhesions
may be administered via cardiothoracics, if it does become a complicated Impayima,
and then decontication is also an option if calcification has occurred within the plural space.
Some late complications may include destruction of the lung tissue or the development of a bronchopfural
fistula or a pyonumophorex. You may get spontaneous entry into the chest wall,
which is termed an Impayima necessitans, or you can get rupture into the abdominal cavity,
leaving to also overwhelm in systemic sepsis. And thank you very much. That is the end of the
talk on superative lung conditions.
How long was this?
