--- page 1 ---
Approach to joint pain and arthritis 
Overview of lecture 
Non-articular pain syndromes 
- 
Localized to the upper limb 
- 
Localized to the lower limb  
- 
Diffuse pain syndromes: 
- 
Widespread pain 
Fibromyalgia syndrome  
- 
Other causes of diffuse pain 
Benign hypermobility syndrome 
Diffuse myofascial pain syndrome 
Parkinsons disease 
Hypothyroidism 
Osteomalacia 
Articular pain syndromes/ arthriti 
- Causes 
- Differential diagnosis 
- Patterns of arthritis 
Monoarthritis:  
- Causes 
- Clinical assessment  
- Role of synovial fluid in the workup of arthritis 
Polyarthritis 
- 
Common causes 
- 
Clinical assessment of a patient with polyarthritis 
- 
Diagnosis 
- 
Management 
 
Background: Joint pain is a common presenting symptom in primary health care.  
Pain may be articular ie. arising from the joint itself or non-articular ie. arising from structures 
around the joint or referred from another site.  
Joint pain is often self-limiting but if it is due to a serious local or systemic condition it may 
result in significant deformity and disability. A systematic approach to joint pain is therefore 
required to establish a correct diagnosis and to ensure that appropriate treatment is initiated. 
 
 


--- page 2 ---
The approach to a patient with joint pain is shown in fig.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICULAR VS NON-ARTICULAR PAIN: 
Articular pain is usually described as a deep-seated pain that is poorly localized, is unchanged 
with passive or active range of movement and may be associated with joint swelling and deformity. 
Non-articular pain is superficial, localized, worse on active range of movement but improves with 
passive range of movement and may be associated with muscle weakness and muscle wasting. 
NON-ARTICULAR PAIN SYNDROMES INVOLVING THE UPPER LIMB: 
A) Shoulder: 
- 
Rotator cuff tendinitis 
- 
Bicipital tendinitis 
- 
Calcific tendinitis 
 
Rotatator cuff tendinitis: 
Rotator cuff tendinitis is inflammation or impingement of the rotator cuff tendons. The rotator 
cuff muscles include the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, subscapularis and teres minor muscles. 
The tendons of these muscles are encased in a common tendon sheath which traverses the 


--- page 3 ---
humeral head and passes through the sub-acromial region of the shoulder joint where it is 
prone to compression or impingement. 
Patients experience pain within the 70ᵒ to 120ᵒ range of abduction of the shoulder referred to 
as the ‘painful arc’. Pain is typically worse on active range of movement and improves with 
passive range of movement.  
 
Bicipital tendinitis: 
Bicipital tendinitis is due to inflammation of the long head of the biceps tendon.  
The biceps tendon runs in the bicipital groove on the humeral head and pain is typically 
localized to the anterior aspect of the shoulder joint.  
Rupture of this tendon can result in weakness of the upper limb and severe disability. The 
‘pop-eye’ sign or balled up biceps muscle is a sign of biceps tendon rupture. 
 
Calcific tendinitis: 
Calcific tendinitis is a disorder characterized by deposits of hydroxyapatite crystals in any 
tendon in the body but most commonly involves the rotator cuff tendons, resulting in pain and 
inflammation. This condition may be associated with metabolic conditions such as diabetes. 
 
B) Elbow: 
• 
Medial epicondylitis (golfer’s elbow ) 
• 
Lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow ) 
• 
Olecranon bursitis 
 
1. Medial epicondylitis: is Inflammation of the common point of insertion of the flexor 
tendons of the wrist joint, at the medial epicondyle of the humerus. It is caused by 
repetitive movement, pain is localized to the medial epicondyle and is reproduced with 
resisted flexion of the wrist joint. 
 
2. Lateral epicondylitis: is inflammation of the common point of insertion of the 
extensors of the wrist joint, at the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. Pain is localized 
to the lateral epicondyle and is reproduced with resisted extension of the wrist joint. 
 
3. Olecranon Bursitis: A bursa is a thin fluid-filled sac that cushions and protects joint 
structures. The olecranon bursa is a fluid-filled sac located on the dorsal aspect of the 
olecranon of the humerus. Inflammation of this bursa results in localized swelling, 
redness and pain at the tip of the elbow joint. 
 
C) Hand: 
- 
Carpel tunnel syndrome 
- 
Flexor tenosynovitis ( trigger finger ) 
- 
Dupuytren’s contracture 
 
Carpel tunnel syndrome: The carpal tunnel is the space at the base of the wrist bounded 
on three sides by the carpal bones and covered by the flexor retinaculum. The median nerve 
passes through the carpal tunnel and supplies sensation to the palmar aspect of the radial 
3½ digits and the distal half of the dorsal aspect of the same digits. It also provides motor 
innervation to the muscles of the thenar eminence, the abductor policis brevis and oppenens 
policis.  
 
Carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by elevated pressure in the carpal tunnel resulting in 
ischaemia of the median nerve. Consequently there is impaired nerve conduction and 
resultant pain and paraesthesia. The classical clinical presentation is pain and or numbness 
or burning sensation in the distribution of the median nerve. There is also weakness of thumb 
grip and fine finger function. Symptoms may initially be worse at night. 
 
 


--- page 4 ---
Flexor tenosynovitis: is due to inflammation of the tendon sheath of the hand which affects 
normal flexor tendon function of the hand. It may result from infection or various 
inflammatory conditions including autoimmune inflammatory conditions, crystal arthropathies 
and diabetes mellitus. Trigger finger is caused by flexor tenosynovitis and is a condition 
which causes pain, stiffness and a sensation of locking when you flex and extend your 
finger. 
 
Dupuytren’s contracture: is a condition that causes thickening of the palmar fascia, 
resulting in flexion contractures usually of the 4th and 5th digits. There is increased risk of this 
disorder in the presence of alcoholic liver disease, diabetes, thyroid disease and there may 
be a genetic predisposition. 
 
NON-ARTICULAR PAIN SYNDROMES INVOLVING THE LOWER LIMBS: 
 
D) Hips: Trochanteric bursitis is inflammation of the bursa (fluid-filled sac) around the greater 
trochanter of the femur. It is a common cause of hip pain which is localized to the outer or 
lateral aspect of the hip and thigh. Pain is typically worse at night, when lying on the affected 
side, getting up from a chair after being seated for a while, or walking up stairs. 
 
E) Knee: 
- 
Anserine bursitis 
- 
Pre-patellar bursitis 
 
Anserine bursitis: The pes anserine bursa is found on the medial aspect of the knee joint 
and lies between the tibia and the 3 tendons that attach the hamstring muscles to the tibia. 
Inflammation of this bursa is called pes anserine bursitis. 
 
Pre-patellar bursitis: is an inflammation of the bursa in the front of the patella. It is commonly 
called housemaid’s or carpenter’s knee. 
 
F) Ankle and foot: 
- 
Achilles tendinitis 
- 
Plantar fasciitis 
- 
Peroneal/tibialis posterior tenosynovitis 
 
Achilles tendinitis: The achilles tendon is the largest tendon in the body. It connects the 
calf muscles to the calcaneus or heel bone. It can withstand great stresses from running and 
jumping but is also prone to tendinitis, a condition associated with over-use and 
degeneration. Tendinitis also predisposes the achilles tendon to rupture, which may cause 
significant disability. 
 
Plantar fasciitis: is one of the most common causes of heel pain. It involves inflammation of 
the plantar fascia, a thick band of tissue that runs across the bottom of the foot. Plantar fasciitis 
typically causes a stabbing pain at the bottom of the foot near the heel and is worse after 
exercise. This condition commonly affects long-distance runners and is associated with 
activities that place a lot of stress on the heel. 
 
Peroneal/ tibialis posterior tenosynovitis: is due to inflammation of the tendon sheath of 
the peroneal tendon that runs along the lateral malleolus.  
 
Tibialis posterior tenosynovitis is due to inflammation of the tendon sheath of the tibialis 
posterior tendon that runs along the medial maleous. As tibialis posterior tenosynovitis 
progresses the arch of the foot can flatten. Patients usually have weakness inverting the foot 
and difficulty standing on their toes on the affected side. 
 
 


--- page 5 ---
Diffuse pain syndromes: 
Diffuse aches and pains are commonly encountered in clinical practice. It may be a transient 
manifestation of a viral infection, associated with joint laxity as in benign hypermobility 
syndrome or due to a more severe systemic illness such as multiple myeloma or malignancy. 
 
Chronic widespread pain is part of the ACR definition for fibromyalgia, a condition with an 
estimated 2% prevalence in the USA and UK. Other patients have pain due to other more 
well-defined conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and polymyalgia rheumatica. It is not 
always possible to identify a cause or categorise all patients with diffuse pain into a defined 
clinical syndrome. 
 
Benign hypermobility syndrome: 
Joint laxity decreases with age and most patients with increased laxity of their joints are 
asymptomatic. Some may fulfil criteria for a well-defined syndrome such as Ehler’s Danlos 
and Marfan’s syndrome. A small proportion of patients with joint laxity are symptomatic and 
may present with aches and pains and arthralgia in the absence of any clinical or laboratory 
abnormality.  
Hypermobile patients are also at increased risk of traumatic lesions and the premature 
development of osteoarthritis. Joint laxity is assessed using the Beighton criteria for the 
benign hypermobility syndrome. Patients with a minimum score of 4/9 is considered to have 
the benign hypermobility syndrome. 
 
Widespread pain syndrome and fibromyalgia: 
Patients with widespread pain are classified as having fibromyalgia according to the ACR 
(2016) criteria. This set of criteria takes into account the widespread pain index (WPI), 
symptom severity score (SSS) and other associated symptoms such as headache, abdominal 
pain and depression. Fibromyalgia is now widely recognised as a clinical syndrome and is 
common in women in their forties. The symptoms of fibromyalgia is chronic diffuse pain and 
stiffness lasting through-out the day. It is thought to represent a somatiform disorder with 
subjective symptoms affecting different organs. Patients may also complain of sleep 
disturbances and waking up unrefreshed, with associated numbness and other pain such as 
migraine, dysmenorrhoea and irritable bowel syndrome. Anxiety and depression scores are 
often high in patients with fibromyalgia. 
 
Myofascial pain syndrome: is a chronic pain disorder in which pressure on trigger points in 
the muscle causes pain in the muscle itself or referred pain to other parts of the body. This 
condition typically occurs after a muscle has been contracted repetitively. Signs and 
symptoms include deep aching muscle pain, that persists or worsens, a tender knot in the 
muscle and difficulty sleeping due to pain. 
 
ARTICULAR PAIN: 
Articular pain is usually deep-seated, poorly localized and present on active and passive range 
of movement. Sometimes the pain may be referred to specific sites. Swelling of the joint may 
be present and this may be due to an effusion, synovial thickening or bony prominences. 
Crepitus, deformity and instability of the joint may be present on examination. 
Arthritis may be due to a wide spectrum of disorders ranging from infections like HIV, crystal 
arthropathies, autoimmune disorders, osteoarthritis and malignancies. 
The following factors help in establishing a cause of the arthritis: 
1. Onset- acute vs chronic 
2. Features of non-inflammatory vs inflammatory 
3. Pattern of joint involvement  
4. Co-existent disorders 


--- page 6 ---
The presence of symptoms for less than 6 weeks is classified as acute and more than 
6 weeks, as chronic. Inflammatory joint pain is usually associated with morning 
stiffness lasting more than an hour, soft tissue swelling, raised inflammatory markers 
and elevated synovial fluid WBC count > 2 X 10⁹.  
Non-inflammatory pain is associated with bony swelling, morning stiffness lasting less 
than 1 hour, normal inflammatory markers and synovial fluid WBC < 2 x 10⁹.  
The pattern of joint involvement may be described as: 
Mono-articular- 1 joint involved 
Oligoarticular- 4 or less joints involved 
Polyarticular - more than 4 joints involved 
Symmetrical arthritis involves joints on both sides of the body and asymmetrical involves 
joints on one side of the body. 
 
Monoarthritis: 
Acute monoarthritis refers to the acute onset of pain and swelling in a single joint. These 
patients require immediate evaluation to exclude septic arthritis.  
Table III lists the conditions that must be considered in patients with monoarthritis.  
The most common causes of monoarthritis include infections, crystal arthropathies, trauma 
and osteoarthritis but it can occur in the setting of any rheumatic disorder. There are 
differences in sex and age distribution of the most common causes of monoarthritis and this 
can assist in determining the most likely diagnosis. Careful history, examination and laboratory 
investigations, including arthrocentesis and synovial fluid analysis is essential in establishing 
a definitive diagnosis. 
Table 1: Differential diagnosis of acute monoarthritis 
 


--- page 7 ---
Infections: 
- 
Non-gonococcal 
bacterial 
arthritis: 
The 
most 
common 
organism 
is 
Staphylococcus aureus, followed by Streptococcal infection. Typical presentation is 
with acute pain, fever and swelling of the joint. Management includes use of 
appropriate antibiotics, needle aspiration or open drainage of the joint.  
 
- 
Gonococcal arthritis: Neisseria gonorrhoea is the most common cause of bacterial 
arthritis in young adults. Typical presentation is that of a migratory arthritis that 
eventually leads to an acute monoarthritis. Some patients may have tenosynovitis, 
vesicular skin rash and oligoarticular involvement. The diagnosis is confirmed by 
culture of N. Gonorrhoea on the joint fluid. Ceftriaxone is recommended as initial 
empiric therapy. 
 
- 
HIV arthropathy may present as a mono, oligo or polyarthritis and frequently involves 
the joints of the lower limbs. Joint fluid is usually sterile however patients are prone to 
septic arthritis due to the common bacterial organisms. 
 
- 
Tuberculosis: Usually presents as an acute monoarthritis and approximately half of 
patients have concomitant pulmonary TB. Diagnosis is made on histology or culture of 
the synovium, although mycobacterium tuberculosis may occasionally be cultured from 
synovial fluid. 
 
- 
Arthritis associated with Streptococcal infections: Patients with acute rheumatic 
fever present with a flitting arthritis and develop monoarthritis or oligoarthritis. The 
diagnosis is made on the basis of the modified Jones criteria.  
Crystal associated arthritis: 
Gout usually involves the first metatarsophalangeal joint, ankle, midfoot or knee, however any 
joint may be involved. The initial attack is usually monoarticular but subsequent attacks may 
be polyarticular. The diagnosis is confirmed by detection of negatively birefringent urate 
crystals on polarised light microscopy. 
Acute pyrophosphate crystal arthropathy or pseudogout occurs in the elderly and is 
caused by the presence of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystals. 
Osteoarthritis: 
Osteoarthritis is a chronic progressive arthritis with little clinical evidence of inflammation. The 
joints that are commonly involved in osteoarthritis are the knees, the first carpometacarpal 
joint and distal interphalangeal joints. 
Trauma: 
Acute monoarthritis following a sporting activity may be due to trauma to the joint. People with 
increased joint laxity are more prone to traumatic injury to the joint. Trauma may lead to 
internal derangement of the joint, haemarthrosis or fracture. 
Avascular necrosis: 
Avascular necrosis is the death of bone tissue due to a lack of blood supply. It most commonly 
affects the hip joints, but the shoulder, knees and ankles may occasionally be involved. The 
commonest cause is corticosteroid therapy, but other causes must be considered. Patients 
present with severe pain in the joint with limitation of movement. 
Haemarthrosis: 
Haemarthrosis or bleeding into a joint may occur due to trauma, haemophilia, clotting factor 
deficiency or in patients on anti-coagulation therapy. A fracture should always be suspected if 
there are fat globules on synovial fluid. 


--- page 8 ---
Foreign body response: 
An acute synovitis may follow penetrating injuries from wood fragments, thorns or other foreign 
materials. 
Clinical assessment of Monoarthritis 
History: A detailed history of the duration, onset, pattern, site and extra-articular features of 
the arthritis is important in supporting a diagnosis. Precipitating events, trauma and co-
morbid illnesses are also helpful. 
Physical examination: A comprehensive physical examination including a general exam, 
musculoskeletal examination and examination of all systems is important. The systemic 
examination may lead to the detection of clinical findings that suggest a particular diagnosis. 
Investigations: Depend on the underlying cause: 
If an infection is suspected, initial investigations should be aimed at trying to confirm a 
diagnosis. Blood cultures, urethral swabs, stool and urine samples should be taken. Initial 
laboratory tests will depend on the most likely differential diagnosis.  
Connective tissue disease screening tests are not required unless a connective tissue 
disease is diagnosed on clinical examination or if the anti-nuclear test is positive.  
Radiographs may help in the diagnosis of fractures, tumours, osteoarthritis and 
chondrocalcinosis. 
The diagnostic work-up of a patient with monoarthritis or polyarthritis based on synovial fluid 
analysis, is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2: diagnostic approach to monoarthritis 
 
 


--- page 9 ---
Management: 
Management will depend on the diagnosis. S 
Septic arthritis will require antibiotics, joint aspiration or drainage. 
Inflammatory arthritis will require non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAID’s) and if there is 
no response, corticosteroids are of value. 
Traumatic injuries will require NSAID’s, physical therapy and avoidance of precipitating 
factors.  
 
Approach to Polyarthritiis: 
Causes of Polyarthritis are shown in Table 2  
Table 2: Causes of a polyarthritis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical assessment of a patient with polyarthritis: 
A careful clinical assessment is the most important part of a diagnostic work-up and laboratory 
tests provide information to support a particular diagnosis.The GALS approach is a useful way 
of performing a comprehensive musculoskeletal examination. GALS is a pneumonic for Gait, 
Arms or upper limbs, Lower limbs and Spine and is recommended to ensure that all joints are 
examined. 
Onset and duration of polyarthritis is important in making a diagnosis. 
Bacterial and viral associated arthritis is usually of acute onset, viral arthritis usually 
resolves within 6 weeks and bacterial arthritis usually does not persist beyond 6 weeks unless 
there is a delay in diagnosis and treatment with appropriate antibiotics.  
Acute polyarthritis may be the initial presentation of inflammatory polyarthritis such as SLE, 
rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthritis. The diagnosis may not be apparent initially if arthritis is 
the only presenting manifestation but may be suspected later on once extra-articular 
manifestations occur. 


--- page 10 ---
The pattern of arthritis, distribution of joints involved and systemic features is also useful in 
establishing a diagnosis. An additive pattern of arthritis which is persistent inflammation in 
affected joints and spread to other joints, is typically seen in RA, SLE and psoriatic arthritis. 
Intermittent pattern of arthritis, involves episodic attacks which resolve completely then recur 
and is seen in gout and pseudogout. A migratory pattern, where affected joints settle 
completely and new joints become involved, is typically seen in rheumatic fever and 
gonococcal arthritis. 
Distal interphalangeal joint involvement is typically seen in osteoarthritis and psoriatic arthritis. 
Symmetrical small joint involvement of the hands and feet are typically seen in RA, SLE and 
psoriatic arthritis. Involvement of the axial spine and peripheral large lower limb joints is typical 
of the spondyloarthropathies. The presence of dactylitis, enthesitis, plantar fasciitis may also 
indicate a spondyloarthropathy. 
The presence of systemic features may also assist in making a diagnosis, Fever may by 
present in SLE, bacterial infections, Adult onset Stills disease. Skin rash may be present in 
SLE, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis etc. 
Diagnosis of polyarthritis: 
The diagnosis of polyarthritis is based on history and clinical findings and is supported by 
laboratory results and radiographs. Investigations should be tailored to the most likely 
diagnosis. Radiographs may not be of benefit in the early stages of disease. The most 
common causes of polyarthritis, articular and extra-articular manifestations, laboratory 
findings and radiographic changes are shown in table 3 
Management: 
Management of the polyarthritis will depend on the cause. NSAID’s may be used in the early 
stages. If infection is excluded, and symptoms persist, then systemic or intra-articular steroids 
may be indicated. Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs or DMARD’s are indicated if a 
diagnosis of a well-defined inflammatory arthritis such as rheumatoid arthritis, SLE and 
psoriatic arthritis is made and the arthritis is unresponsive to initial therapies. 
 
QUIZ: please attempt to answer the following to test your understanding of the 
material covered in this lecture. This is just a few sample questions and not a 
comphrehensive list of questions. The answers are in the lectures, text notes and text 
book. 
A 36 year old woman presents with a painful right shoulder. The pain is superficial 
and is worse on active abduction of the shoulder joint and improves with passive 
range of movement.  
1. Is the source of her pain articular or non-articular pain and explain? 
2. What are the differentiating features between articular and non-articular pain? 
3. Which muscles constitute the rotator cuff of the shoulder joint? 
A 42 year old woman presents with symmetrical arthritis involving the small joints of 
the hands and feet. The distal interphalangeal joints are spared. 
1. Based on the clinical presentation what is the differential diagnosis 
2. What are the patterns of arthritis and how does it assist in making a diagnosis? 
A 40 year old man presents with a painful and swollen right knee joint. 
1. What is the differential diagnosis? 
2. What is the importance of synovial fluid examination in this patient? 
 
 
